NEGATIVE 


THE CASE AGAINST THE UNITED STATES FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SUBSTANTIALLY 
CURTAILING ITS DOMESTIC 
SURVEILLANCE 



             BY 
             
            RICH EDWARDS, PH.D. 
PROFESSOR OF COMMUNICATION STUDIES 
              BAYLOR UNIVERSITY 
              
LINCOLN GARRETT 
ASSISTANT DEBATE COACH 
UNIVERSITY OF KENTUCKY 





       NATIONAL DEBATE HANDBOOK 
               2015-2016 
               
               
               
               COMMUNICAN 
              P.O. BOX 20243 
            WACO, TX 76702 
       On the Web: www.communican.org  [HYPERLINK: http://www.communican.org/]
       Email: communican@hot.rr.com  [HYPERLINK: mailto:communican@hot.rr.com]
          Phone: (254) 848-5959 	Fax: (254) 848-4473 
          
TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Negative Strategies 

  Analysis of the Terms of the Topic .. 	1
  
  Making Strategic Choices on the Surveillance Topic ... 	2
  
  Responses to Cases Proposing to Curtail the Federal Government's 
  Electronic Surveillance Programs ...................................................................... 3 
  
Responses to Cases Proposing to Curtail the Federal Government's 
  Physical Surveillance Programs.........................................................................11 
  
Generic and Specific Disadvantages  ...........................................................16 



Index to Negative Evidence 

  Analysis of the Terms of the Topic ... 17 
  
  Responses to Cases Proposing to Curtail the Federal Government's 
  Electronic Surveillance Programs .....................................................................17 
  
Responses to Cases Proposing to Curtail the Federal Government's 
  Physical Surveillance Programs.........................................................................24 
  
Generic and Specific Disadvantages . ..............................................26 



Negative Evidence 

  Analysis of the Terms of the Topic ... 31 
  
  Responses to Cases Proposing to Curtail the Federal Government's 
  Electronic Surveillance Programs .....................................................................32 
  
Responses to Cases Proposing to Curtail the Federal Government's 
  Physical Surveillance Programs.........................................................................88 
  
Generic and Specific Disadvantages ...................................................................... 100 

 1
 
 
RESOLVED: THE UNITED STATES FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SHOULD SUBSTANTIALLY CURTAIL 
  ITS DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE. 
This volume of The National Debate Handbook contains 2,000 pieces of evidence on this year's topic. To compile 
this volume we acquired books, government documents, journals, and periodicals from the top university libraries throughout the country. Over 1500 hard-to-find sources were consulted; special emphasis was placed on gathering evidence from books. These sources are all current, with almost no evidence before 2012. The evidence covers a variety of cases under the topic, and an extensive section with generic and specific disadvantages is included. The case response arguments are presented in complete form; that is, you will find all of the evidence needed to answer affirmative cases. 

  LOCATING EVIDENCE IN THE TWO-VOLUME SET 
The 2015-16 topic is as follows: Resolved: The United States federal government should substantially curtail its 
domestic surveillance. While this resolution has some direction, there will be some occasions where evidence from the affirmative volume of The National Debate Handbook will be useful to the negative team. 

  ANALYSIS OF THE TERMS IN THE TOPIC 
The first section of The National Debate Handbook provides definitions of the terms in the resolution. Fortunately 
for the negative, the 2015-16 resolution provides some limiting terms that will aid in winning topicality debates. The evidence in the Topicality section of The National Debate Handbook is designed to provide the negative team with definitions of the topic to construct topicality challenges. The following paragraphs address several of the key topicality issues to be considered on the 2015-16 resolution. 
This year's resolution contains several terms that are susceptible to various interpretations. There are, therefore, 
many opportunities for topicality debates with this resolution. The most important phrase in this resolution is --domestic surveillance.‖ The adjective, --domestic,‖ means that we will be talking about surveillance that takes place 
inside of the United States, as opposed to --foreign intelligence.‖ 
The verb in the resolutional sentence is --curtail‖ - the affirmative plan must propose to substantially curtail the 
federal government's own programs of --domestic surveillance.‖ The word --curtail‖ is defined in the New Oxford American Dictionary as to --impose a restriction on‖ (2010, p. 425). The American Heritage College Writer's Dictionary defines --curtail‖ as --to cut short; reduce‖ (2013, p. 247). The Encarta World English Dictionary suggests that --curtail‖ means --to reduce the length or duration of something‖ (1999, p. 444). 
The word --surveillance‖ comes from a French root word meaning --to watch over.‖ The Collins English Dictionary 
defines --surveillance‖ as --close observation or supervision maintained over a person, group, etc., especially one in custody or under suspicion‖ (2006, p. 1621). The Encarta World English Dictionary says that --surveillance‖ means the --continual observation of a person or group, especially one suspected of doing something illegal‖ (1999, p. 1797). John Gilliom, professor of political science at Ohio State University, is the author of the 2013 book, SuperVision: An Introduction to the Surveillance Society. In the introduction to his book, he defines --surveillance‖ as --monitoring people in order to regulate or govern their behavior‖ (2013, p. 2). 
Yet other commentators indicate that the term --surveillance‖ can refer to watching over such things as crops, 
animals, prevalence of disease or other non-human things. Evelyn Ruppert, professor of sociology at the Open University, writing in the Routledge Handbook of Surveillance Studies, explains how the term --surveillance‖ can be used in such a context: --The surveillance of non-human life is a routine and everyday feature of contemporary societies that goes unnoticed or unrecognized. In part this may be because it is difficult to conceive of non-humans as being subjects (i.e. as possessing subjectivity) under surveillance in the same way as humans. Non-humans are rarely granted the same reflexive agency as humans and often occupy tightly bracketed, and relatively uncontested, socio- economic niches as material resources or health threats. From this point of view, ‗disease surveillance,' ‗veterinary surveillance' and ‗foodchain surveillance' might be seen as related to the more pernicious forms of surveillance dealt 
with in surveillance studies by terminology only‖ (2012, p. 217) 
William Staples, professor of sociology at the University of Kansas, is the author of the 2014 book, Everyday 
Surveillance: Vigilance and Visibility in Postmodern Life. He refers to the storage of DNA samples as --surveillance:‖ At the hard end of the spectrum, DNA samples are being systematically collected on most people who come in contact with the justice system and permanently stored in a vast database. The body, I contend, is a central target of many postmodern surveillance techniques and rituals‖ (2014, p. 6). Surveillance can also include physical observation, such as the use of informants, as well as electronic monitoring of personal information. Paul Rosenzweig, professor of law at George Mason University, describes these two aspects of --surveillance:‖ --Traditionally, the concept of --surveillance‖ has been taken to mean an act of physical surveillance - e.g., following someone around or planting a 
secret camera in an apartment‖ (State of Federal Privacy and Data Security Law, 2012, p. 101) 

2

Another important limiting term in the resolution is the little pronoun, --its‖ - the affirmative plan must propose to 
curtail (or limit) the U.S. federal government's own domestic surveillance. Most law enforcement in the United States is performed by police officers employed by city or county governments. The inclusion of the word, --its,‖ means that we should be focusing on the surveillance performed by federal government agencies, not the activities of local police forces. Similarly, the resolution gives no power to the affirmative to limit or change what private Internet companies will do with their surveillance practices or privacy policies. Since the 2015-16 resolution encompasses the activities of dozens of federal government agencies, it is certainly broad enough without the inclusion of affirmative cases dealing with local police or private industry practices. 

  MAKING STRATEGIC CHOICES ON THE SURVEILLANCE TOPIC 
The best advice when choosing a negative position is to select a disadvantage strategy that you believe in - 
meaning you actually believe the disadvantage would happen if the affirmative plan were adopted. You may be successful taking --devil's advocacy‖ positions, but you will inevitably be more persuasive on those positions about which you care deeply. On this topic, those disadvantages could involve preventing terrorism, identifying and preventing cyber attacks, avoiding conflicts with China, preserving Net neutrality, or avoiding destructive economic growth, among others. The following paragraphs explore some key questions that should be asked about the affirmative plan. 
Does the affirmative plan clearly do what the resolution says? You should insist that the affirmative team clearly 
explain how their plan --substantially curtails‖ the federal government's domestic surveillance. Consult the definition section of the National Debate Handbook for definitions of the various terms in the resolution. 
Will the "rights" advantages of the affirmative case be able to outweigh additional risks of a terrorist attack? 
Most of the cases on this topic (though not all) will feature the weighing of rights (the right to privacy, freedom of association, Fourth Amendment protections against unwarranted search) against the threat of another devastating terrorist attack. If the case limits the investigative powers of the NSA or the FBI, you must be prepared to weigh the case advantages against the terrorism disadvantage. 
What will be the impact of the plan on U.S. power and prestige? One of the major arguments on any recent policy 
debate topic concerns U.S. hegemony. --Hegemony‖ refers to a situation where one nation - in this case, the United States - is able to exercise economic and military control over large portions of the globe. Preserving or extending hegemony can be either a good or bad thing. Defenders of U.S. hegemony argue that it helps maintain world peace. Michael Mandelbaum, director of the American Foreign Policy Program at Johns Hopkins University, and New York Times columnist, Thomas Friedman, defend this position in their 2011 book, That Used to Be Us: How America Fell Behind in the World It Invented: --On this matter, we mince no words: A world shaped by a strong America -- strong enough to provide political, economic, and moral leadership -- will never be a perfect world, but it will be a better world than any alternative we can envision. In fact, the United States provides to the world many of the services that governments furnish to the societies they govern. With a weakened America, one that has failed to rise to the challenges it confronts and has therefore become less wealthy and less confident, the world will likely enjoy less governance, which will make it more disorderly and less prosperous. In that case, everyone, not just Americans, will suffer‖ (p. 351). They add that, --in this unstable world, the United States stands out as both a beacon and a supplier of 
stability. Americans sometimes underestimate the importance, and the value, of American power for other countries.‖ 
Opponents of U.S. hegemony believe that it results in unending wars, such as the one still going on Afghanistan. 
The real purpose of the U.S. promotion of globalization, according to this view, is to preserve and advance the power of large corporations. The project to promote globalization is often called the --neoliberal model‖ or the --Washington Consensus.‖ Michael Parenti, a Yale Ph.D., is a long-time critic of the U.S. project to promote free trade. In his 2011 book, The Face of Imperialism, he says the neoliberal model creates an epidemic of poverty around the world: --There is a ‗mystery' we must explain. How is it that as trans-national corporate investments and trade with poor countries --  and international aid and loans to these same countries -- have all increased dramatically over the past half century, so has world poverty? The number of people living in poverty is growing at a faster rate than the world's population. In other words, poverty is spreading among the many even as wealth accumulates among the few. As the global empire grows stronger, the world's working populations grow larger but poorer‖ (p. 49). Dr. Parenti believes that the effort to expand the free trade model is corporate robbery: --By displacing people from their lands and robbing them of their self-sufficiency, corporations create labor markets overcrowded with desperate populations forced into shanty towns to toil for poverty wages (when they can get work), often in violation of the country's own minimum wage laws. In various Third World countries, workers are paid pennies per hour by corporate giants such as Nike, Disney, Walmart, and J.C. Penney‖ (p. 54). 
How would the adoption of the plan affect the political capital of President Obama or the outcome of the 
presidential election in 2016? Would adopting the plan increase or decrease the political capital at the President's disposal? Would it increase or decrease the President's chances for passage of key pieces of legislation now before 
Congress? The --politics‖ disadvantage is an argument commonly used in policy debate. Some negative teams will 

3


argue that an increase in President Obama's political capital is bad because it will give him the Congressional votes 
necessary to pass some undesirable legislation (perhaps a tax increase on wealthy Americans that will devastate the U.S. economy). Other negative teams will argue that a decrease in President Obama's political capital is bad because it will cost him the Congressional votes necessary to pass some desirable legislation. 

RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S ELECTRONIC 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS 

RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING NSA SURVEILLANCE POWERS 
Affirmative cases proposing to limit NSA authority will likely propose one or more changes in the oversight 
processes specified in the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) as it has been amended by passage of the PATRIOT Act and various PATRIOT Act extensions. The FISA Court is made up of 11 judges who are appointed by the Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court; all FISA Court Judges must be drawn from the pool of U.S. District Court Judges. These judges continue to serve in their normal judicial capacities, but they must also be available to approve or deny requests for national security-related surveillance orders made by the NSA, FBI, or other intelligence agencies. 
The most common criticism of the FISA Court structure is that it serves as a --rubber stamp‖ on federal 
surveillance authority because it hears only from the government side. But you will find evidence in this section of the National Debate Handbook to show that NSA surveillance is essential to success in the war on terrorism and that FISA Court supervision is optimal at present. Attorney, Stewart Baker, describes the essential role that intelligence collection plays in national security: --On occasion, the survival of the country may depend on good intelligence. Wars are won and lives are lost when intelligence succeeds or fails. Nations do whatever they can to collect information that might affect their future so dramatically. After a long era of national naiveté, when we thought that gentlemen didn't read other gentlemen's mail and when intercepting even diplomatic radio signals was illegal, the United States found itself thrust by World War II and the Cold War into the intelligence business, and now we play by the same rules as the rest of the world‖ (The Administration's Use of FISA Authorities, House Hearing, July 17, 2013, p. 76). 
A proposal commonly suggested by NSA critics is the appointment of opposing counsel to appear before the FISA 
Court whenever a government agency requests an authorization to search. The suggestion is often made, that having only one side appear before the court is an aberration from the procedure followed in other U.S. courts. Actually, however, the FISA Court procedure is nearly identical to what happens whenever a state or local law enforcement official requests a search warrant: they appear before a judge who must decide whether the government has reasonable cause for the issuance of the warrant. In no such cases does the judge hear from the lawyer of the person targeted for the search before issuing the warrant. Such a procedure would tip off the target that a search is imminent, likely making the search a waste of time. FISA Court Judges are drawn from a pool of sitting U.S. District Court Judges - a group of the nation's most distinguished jurists. 

RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING NSA BULK DATA COLLECTION 
An affirmative case calling for the elimination of the NSA's power to collect and store bulk telephone metadata 
will likely be the most common affirmative case on the 2015-16 topic, unless the U.S. Congress takes that option off of the table by opting to do that very thing. This volume of the National Debate Handbook goes to press in early May of 2015. It is unknown at this time what the U.S. Congress will choose to do with Section 215 of the USA PATRIOT Act. This highly controversial provision was renewed by Congress in 2008, but with the stipulation that it would expire on June 1, 2015 unless Congress again would choose to renew it. Some recent events make it appear more likely that Congress will choose to allow Section 215 to expire. 
Groups opposed to bulk data collection have joined together to pressure Congress to end this practice. Journalist, 
Dennis Fisher, discussed the efforts of this new coalition in an April 8, 2015 news article: 
  A broad group of civil-rights, technology and political groups from across the spectrum has developed a 
  new initiative to advocate for the repeal of Section 215 of the USA PATRIOT Act, the part that provides the authority for the bulk collection of phone metadata and other information. The new group is calling itself Fight215.org and comprises more than 30 organizations, including the ACLU, the EFF, the Center for Democracy and Technology, the Freedom of the Press Foundation, the Internet Archive, Silent Circle and Human Rights Watch. The members of the coalition are using the upcoming June 1 expiration of Section 215 as the impetus for people to call members of Congress and urge them to vote against the renewal of that 
  provision. 	(https://threatpost.com/new-coalition-launches-fight-against-patriot-act-section-215/112070) 
Another factor making it likely that Congress will choose to curtail Section 215 powers is the ruling of the U.S. 
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, striking down the federal government's power to engage in bulk data collection. Ellen Nakashima, Washington Post staff writer, describes this ruling in a May 8, 2015 article: --A federal 
appeals court ruled Thursday that the National Security Agency's collection of millions of Americans' phone records 

4


violates the USA Patriot Act, marking the first time an appellate panel has weighed in on a controversial surveillance program that has divided Congress and ignited a national debate over the proper scope of the government's spy powers. In a blistering 97-page opinion, a unanimous three-judge panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 2nd Circuit overturned a lower court and determined that the government had stretched the meaning of the statute to enable ‗sweeping surveillance' of Americans' data in ‗staggering' volumes‖ (p. A1). The Second Circuit court ruling did, however, say that bulk data collection could continue pending the action of Congress on the extension of Section 215 powers. The heart of the court's ruling was that Congress had not intended to authorize the bulk collection and storage of all telephone metadata with the wording contained in Section 215 of the PATRIOT Act. If Congress, however, chooses to extend this portion of the Act with the full knowledge of the NSA's interpretation of the Act, then the court's ruling as to legislative intent would become a moot issue. 
A showdown is brewing between the House and Senate over the extension of Section 215 powers. Republican 
leaders in the House of Representatives have supported the passage of the USA Patriot Act, a measure that would impose a specific warrant requirement on the collection of telephone metadata. This measure has already achieved passage in the House Judiciary Committee and is scheduled for action on the floor of the House. Senate Majority Leader, Mitch McConnell, on the other hand, opposes the USA Freedom Act and has introduced legislation to extend Section 215 powers to 2020 in its present form. Given this strong divergence of opinion between House and Senate Republicans, it seems likely that nothing will pass unless they can compromise with the passage of a weaker version of the USA Freedom Act. If Congress remains completely deadlocked on the issue, then Section 215 will expire. 
The point of the preceding paragraphs is to say that debaters will need to pay special attention to the news over the 
summer to determine whether the abolition of Section 215 remains a viable affirmative case, or whether it will already have been done by Congressional action (or inaction.) In the event that Section 215 powers survive Congressional changes, negative teams will need to prepare for this case as the most likely choice of affirmative teams. 
You will find evidence in this section of the National Debate Handbook defending the power of the NSA to 
engage in bulk data collection and storage of telephone metadata. The essential negative argument is that identifying an impending terrorist attack is like finding a needle in a haystack. But government agencies have no chance of finding the needle if they are denied the opportunity to look at the haystack. This is the argument made by Senate Majority Leader, Mitch McConnell in opposing passage of the USA Freedom Act: --But Mr. McConnell gave no ground. On Thursday he blasted the House bill as ‗an untested, untried and more cumbersome system' that would neither ‗keep us safe or protect our privacy.' ‗Section 215 helps us find a needle in the haystack,' he said. ‗But under the U.S.A. Freedom Act, there might not be a haystack at all'‖ (New York Times, May 8, 2015, p. A1). 
The collection of telephone metadata is not a significant intrusion on privacy, in that this data does not include the 
content of telephone calls or even the names associated with particular telephone numbers. James Cole, Deputy Attorney General of the United States, explained the meaning of --metadata‖ collection to the House Judiciary Committee: --The 215 program, as many of you have already heard, involves the collection of metadata from telephone calls. These are telephone records maintained by the phone companies. They include the number that was dialed, the date and time of the call, and the length of the call. They do not include names or other personal identifying information. They do not include cell site or other location information, and they do not include the content of any phone calls‖ (The Administration's Use of FISA Authorities, House Hearing, July 17, 2013, p. 6). 

RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING GOVERNMENT ACCESS TO "BIG DATA" 
Affirmative cases in this area will likely propose limits on federal government databases designed to track the 
everyday activities of U.S. residents. William Staples, professor of sociology at the University of Kansas, explains the 
meaning of the term, --big data,‖ in his 2014 book, Everyday Surveillance: Vigilance and Visibility in Postmodern Life: 
  Corporate personnel files, hospital, mental health, and substance abuse agency records, as well as 
  insurance company databanks, join all those demographic, financial, credit, and consumer habits information to create what is now called --big data‖; massive conjoined datasets that can be used to create --virtual‖ data- based identities of us as well as new analytic tools used to --mine‖ these data in search of patterns and to sort people into different categories. Once created, our --virtual doppelgangers‖ are, as Mark Poster suggests, --capable of being acted upon by computers at many social locations without the least awareness by the 
  individual concerned yet just as surely as if the individual were present somehow inside the computer.‖ (p. 5) 
  You will find evidence in this section of the National Debate Handbook questioning the harms associated with 
government collection of --big data.‖ For the most part, --big data‖ consists of a collection of what people have chosen to share with others. The rise of social media has been made possible because people are increasingly choosing to be seen by the world, rather than to hide in their own world. John Gilliom, professor of political science at Ohio University, offers the following observation in his 2013 book, Supervision: An Introduction to the Surveillance Society: --People use social networking sites to see and be seen. Rather than being a prisonlike panopticon where trapped people follow the rules because they're afraid someone is watching, with Facebook and similar sites people are 
probably more afraid that no one is watching, that no one cares what they're up to. So, many users discipline 

5


themselves in a different way by divulging as much as possible about their lives and thoughts. In this medium, being 
connected means actively - and sometimes obsessively - participating, even if the content is shallow or trite‖ (p. 49). 
People are making conscious choices to embrace the surveillance society, according to William Staples, director of 
the Surveillance Studies Research Center at the University of Kansas: 
  We facilitate everyday surveillance as well when we consume products that either make us the potential 
  targets of surveillance or, alternatively, give us the tools to watch others. Here, the daily act of consumption - so central to the organization of late capitalism - becomes directly tied to the distribution and spread of disciplinary technology. Seduced by the market's desires and our overwhelming dependence on it, we have become, to paraphrase Mark Poster, --individuals plugged into the circuits of our own panoptic control.‖ If the company hasn't already done so, we are quite willing to --wire‖ ourselves in as we rush to buy the latest products that offer us access to the --Net,‖ the --Web,‖ and --cell‖ phones (the irony of this new terminology should not be ignored). We post pictures of ourselves, families, and friends on the Web so anyone can see us. We also install the device to monitor our kids' texting, to keep an eye on their driving, or even to test them for drugs. We buy the videocams and use them to document our own movements, or we turn them on our friends, neighbors, or strangers and post them on YouTube for, the world to see. In a media saturated life where seemingly anyone can be a --star,‖ everybody gets their fifteen minutes of fame. (Everyday Surveillance: 
  Vigilance and Visibility in Postmodern Life, 2013, p. 203) 
  The question negative teams should ask is this: Why should the federal government be prohibited from accessing 
the information that an average citizen can access with a simple Google search? Consider the criticism directed at federal intelligence agencies after the Boston Marathon bombing when it became clear that the Tsarnaev brothers had posted clues to their intentions on social media sites. Why had the government missed the clues that were so publicly made available? Similarly, military authorities were criticized for failing to realize that U.S. Army Major Nidal Hasan had posted his evil intentions for military personnel being deployed to the Middle East even before he perpetrated the deadly attacks at Fort Hood. Mary Ellen Callahan, chief privacy officer for the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, explains that it is only reasonable to expect that federal officials are paying attention to what is publicly available on social media Websites: --Traditional media sources, and more recently social media sources, such as Twitter, Facebook, and a vast number of blogs, provide public reports on breaking events with a potential nexus to homeland security. By examining open-source traditional and social media information, comparing it with many other sources of information, and including it where appropriate into NOC [National Operations Center] reports, the NOC can provide a more comprehensive picture of breaking or evolving events‖ (DHS Monitoring of Social Networking and Media: Enhancing Intelligence Gathering and Ensuring Privacy, House Hearing, Feb. 16, 2012, p. 13). 

RESPONSES TO CYBER CRIME CASES CURTAILING NSA MONITORING OF THE INTERNET. 
Affirmative cases dealing with cyber crime will likely argue that the NSA should be prohibited from undermining 
encryption systems and insisting on the creation of --back doors‖ into standard computer software encryption systems. You will find evidence in this section of the National Debate Handbook to support the maintenance of a very strong role for the federal government in continuing to protect the Internet from cyber attacks. The ability to defeat encryption systems has always been a hallmark of effective intelligence operations. A major turning point in World War II was achieved when British intelligence succeeded in breaking the Nazi Enigma code. Similarly, the U.S. Navy achieved victory in the battle of Midway in the Pacific largely because signals intelligence had succeeded in breaking the code used by the Japanese to send instructions to the Japanese fleet. Any action designed to prevent U.S. intelligence agencies from engaging in the breaking of encryption systems would be tantamount to surrendering U.S. national security to our enemies and to a host of hackers who now threaten the security of the Internet. The negative position in defense of federal government monitoring of the Internet from cyber attacks is so strong that it should be used as a disadvantage against any affirmative case proposing to limit the ability of intelligence agencies to monitor Internet activity. 
Cyber attacks now represent a significant threat to the U.S. economy and to U.S. national security. Cyber attacks 
are on the increase, according to Janet Napolitano, former Secretary of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security: 
  Cyber incidents have increased significantly over the last decade and the United States continues to 
  confront a dangerous combination of known and unknown vulnerabilities in cyberspace, strong and rapidly expanding adversary capabilities, and limited threat and vulnerability awareness. There have been instances of theft and compromise of sensitive information from both government and private sector networks. Last year, the DHS U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) received more than 100,000 incident reports, and released more than 5,000 actionable cybersecurity alerts and information products. (Homeland 
  Security Threats and Agency Responses, Senate Hearing, Sept. 19, 2012, p. 58) 
  Melissa Hathaway, president of Hathaway Global Strategies, Inc., reports that we are now --seeing almost 67,000 
new malware threats on the Internet every day. This means more than forty-five new viruses, worms, spyware, and 
other threats were being created every minute - more than double the number in January 2009‖ (Securing Cyberspace: 

6


A New Domain for National Security, 2012, p. 146). We learn almost weekly of some new major retailer reporting that consumer credit card information has been stolen by cyber criminals. U.S. Representative from Pennsylvania, Patrick 
Meehan, provided a summary of some of the more recent such incidents: 
  Recent cyber breaches at retailers, including Target, Nieman Marcus, and Michael's, have once again 
  brought the public's attention to the threat of criminals accessing their personal information. Unfortunately, such data breaches are neither new nor rare. The Target attack alone comprised the information of approximately 110 million consumers, and it could be months, or even years, before we know how many of those customers will eventually be victims of fraud. In 2012, an estimated 16.6 million Americans experienced identity theft, costing consumers nearly $25 billion, so this problem is not going away. Just last week many people learned about the so-called Heartbleed vulnerability that affects the encryption software used in many e-commerce sites. (Protecting Your Personal Data: How Law Enforcement Works with the Private Sector to 
  Prevent Cybercrime, House Hearing, Apr. 16, 2014, p. 2) 
  According to Kelly Gable, professor of law at Drexel University, --hackers scan U.S. government computer 
systems literally thousands of times a day, looking for a way in. In 2001, hackers successfully attacked an electric power grid in California and a seaport in Houston; more recently, hackers planted malicious software in the U.S. power grid, oil and gas distribution computer systems, telecommunications networks, and computer systems of the financial services industry‖ (Policing the Internet, 2012, p. 50). 
Cyber attacks are not simply the work of individual hackers; the cyber threat increasingly comes from terrorist 
groups as well as governments hostile to the United States. Kevin Freeman, senior fellow at the Center for Security Policy, reports that terrorists are now working on plans to cripple U.S. vital infrastructure through cyber attacks: --There are rumors that al Qaeda will work with anyone to hack America's electronic economy. According to a spring 2013 report from Bill Gertz, a journalist and national security expert, An al-Qaida website recently posted a notice calling for major attacks on vital U.S. infrastructure. Basically [they are] calling on jihadists hackers to join together in this attack‖ (Game Plan: How to Protect Yourself From the Coming Cyber-Economic Attack, 2014, p. 18). Nirode Mohanty, author of the 2012 book, Radicalism in Islam: Resurgence and Ramifications, reports on the growing likelihood that terrorists will turn to cyber warfare: --Cyberterrorists who are politically motivated can inject systems with cyberweapons including: malicious software (malware), viruses, Trojan horses (which facilitate unauthorized access to the user's computer system), worms, self-replicating computer program logic bombs, and sophisticated computer codes, to corrupt, erase, or change data. Terrorists indulge in these acts to advance political, religious or ideological causes by violence‖ (p. 406). 
National governments also represent a cyber threat. Ronald Sievert, professor of government at the University of 
Texas, describes the scale of the cyber threat from China: --Looming in the background as a potential threat is China, a nation with unknown intentions that has been highly aggressive in penetrating our cyber infrastructure and defense establishment. The former Chief of Central Intelligence Agency (--CIA‖) Counter Intelligence noted it is likely that China has dispatched approximately 1,000 State Security Officers to the U.S. in an effort to obtain American military technology by any means possible‖ (National Security Law Journal, 2014, p. 50). Paul Rosenzweig, professor of law at George Washington University, worries that China may already have the ability to cripple the U.S. economy if it 
chooses to do so: 
  Even more chillingly, some reports have suggested that our electronic grid and telecommunications 
  systems have already been infiltrated by logic bombs (malicious code inserted in a system that will be set off only on instruction or when certain conditions are met). In 2009, the Wall Street Journal reported that software had been placed into our system, so that it could be detonated at a later date, presumably during the time of war. Doing so could cripple our economy and military capabilities at a time of crisis. Richard Clarke, the former cybersecurity czar, likens these cyber logic bombs to mines, and blames China for their placement. 
  (Cyber Warfare: How Conflicts in Cyberspace Are Challenging America and the World, 2013, pp. 39-40) 
  The recent North Korean cyber attack against Sony Pictures demonstrates the power of that government to engage 
in cyber warfare. U.S. Representative from Ohio, Steve Chabot, discusses the potential threat from North Korea: 
  North Korea's growing cyber capabilities present the greatest likelihood of a cyber conflict in Asia. Earlier 
  this year it demonstrated its capabilities in South Korea, where it crippled the operations of banks and news agencies by wiping the hard drives of thousands of computers. While McAfee's report on what is now called Operation Troy does not attribute these attacks to North Korea, it could not be clearer who was responsible. North Korea is not only a nuclear threat, but it a serious cyber threat as well‖ (Asia: The Cyber Security 
  Battleground, House Hearing, July 23, 2013, p. 3) 
  Offensive cyber warfare preparations are also underway in Russia and Iran. According to law professor, Marc 
Goodman, Iran has already sponsored attacks against the U.S. banking industry: --The widespread denial-of-service (DDOS) attack against America's financial industry by Iran was shocking for its size and scope and for the massive 
volume of data generated by the perpetrators. Some banks were hit with a sustained flood of traffic that peaked at 70 

7


gigabits per second. To put that volume of DDoS traffic in perspective, it is as if 1 billion people simultaneously phoned your bank, hung up, and immediately dialed back one second later. In order for your call (or visit to its Web site) to get connected, you would be number 1,000,000,001 on the list to get through. In other words, for all intents and purposes, you would never reach the bank‖ (Future Crimes, 2015, p. 32). 
Shane Harris, fellow at the New America Foundation is the author of the 2014 book, @War: The Rise of the 
Military-Internet Complex. He explains how a cyber attack could cripple the U.S. economy: 
  If instead of hijacking commercial airliners and flying them into buildings on September 11, 2001, al- 
  Qaeda terrorists had broken into the databases of a major financial institution and erased its contents, the gears of the global financial system could grind to a halt. Transactions couldn't be processed. Trades wouldn't clear. The trillions of dollars that sloshed around the world every day did so through computer networks. The --money‖ was really just data. It was balances in accounts. A distributed network of electronic ledgers that kept track of who bought and sold what, who moved money where, and to whom. Corrupt just a portion of that information, or destroy it, and mass panic would ensue, McConnell said. Whole economies could collapse just for lack of confidence, to say nothing of whether all banks and financial institutions would ever be able to 
  recover the data they lost. (p. 141) 
  Michael McCaul, chair of the U.S. House Committee on Homeland Security, warns that cyber attacks could 
cripple critical infrastructure components: --An attack on our transformers could cripple our power grids and our economy would follow. This is not science fiction; it is reality. A report recently released by Mandiant confirmed China is the source of nearly 90% of cyber attacks against the United States. Most troubling is that these hackers targeted a company that provides remote access to more than 60% of North America's oil and gas pipelines‖ (DHS Cybersecurity: Roles and Responsibilities to Protect the Nation's Critical Infrastructure, House Hearing, Mar. 13, 2013, p. 4). 
Malware attacks can hide in encrypted computer code. If government agencies are prevented from monitoring the 
Internet for threats, they would lack the means to protect the U.S. economy and critical U.S. infrastructure. James Lewis, Senior Fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, warns that reliance on the private sector to defend the Internet is a losing proposition: --The call to shrink government and rely on the private sector and markets to address public problems contributes to weak cybersecurity - a government, in the infamous words of Grover Norquist, ‗small enough to drown in a bathtub‖ is no match for advanced foreign opponents'‖ (Securing Cyberspace: A New Domain for National Security, 2012, p. 113). Similarly, Paul Rosenzweig, professor of law at George Washington University, emphasizes the need for the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the NSA to remain involved in protecting the Internet: --In theory, the answer is easy: the strong preference should be for a civilian response for what is, after all, a predominantly civilian network. But, the hard truth is that the civilian side of the government lacks the expertise and manpower to effectively do the job - which is why the DHS has announced its plan to hire 1,000 new cyber experts. But, until these new experts are on board (and finding and hiring that many will be a long process), civilian defenses will have to rely on existing expertise that lies predominantly within the NSA‖ (Cyber Warfare: How Conflicts in Cyberspace Are Challenging America and the World, 2013, p. 227). 

RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE OF GPS DATA 
Affirmative cases in this area will likely require that the federal government secure a specific warrant before 
searching the GPS locational data of a U.S. resident. But requiring a search warrant every time law enforcement officials want to establish a person's location would dramatically slow down criminal investigations. Peter Modafferi, 
chair of the International Association of Chiefs of Police, explains why his organization opposes this change: 
  Geolocation evidence is essential to obtain in the early stages of investigations when probable cause has 
  not been established. Requiring probable cause to get basic, limited information about a person's historical location would make it significantly more difficult to solve crimes and seek justice for victims. We do not have the luxury of setting the pace at a crime scene or in conducting an investigation. If we are constrained by a process that slows our progress in pursuing justice by extending the timeline of an investigation, the digital evidence at a crime scene may well go unexplored, evidence not be seized and analyzed, and our investigation will not meet our needs or the expectations of victims or civilized society as a whole. (Electronic Communications Privacy Act, Part II: Geolocation Privacy and Surveillance, House Hearing, Apr. 25, 2013, 
  p. 24) 
  Modifferi points out that speedy access to GPS data can exonerate a suspect and avoid a wrongful arrest and 
conviction: --The court room and judicial process are the safety net for a free and just society. That wrongful convictions have occurred is tragic and everything must be done to avoid them in the future. The process starts at the crime scene or with knowledge that a crime may have been committed and proceeds ahead. In the end, the basic fact is that you cannot have a wrongful conviction without a wrongful arrest. A wrongful arrest is the result of an inadequate investigation. We have found that wrongful arrests occur because what we thought was proof wasn't always concrete, 
and what we thought was science was not always definitive. Some of our investigations, based on flawed conclusions, 

8


were neither necessarily accurate nor conclusive. Geolocation information offers tremendous factual data that can be used to remedy these failures. Geolocation information can confirm or refute identifications, confessions and inaccurate testimony‖ (Electronic Communications Privacy Act, Part II: Geolocation Privacy and Surveillance, House Hearing, Apr. 25, 2013, p. 24). 
Even the ACLU admits that law enforcement officials must have immediate access to GPS data in terrorism 
investigations such as the Boston Marathon bombing. Catherine Crump, staff attorney for the ACLU, quite remarkably 
indicates that her organization would support an exception to the warrant requirement for terrorism investigations: 
  Over the past week and a half, our nation has been gripped by the horrific events in Boston. Today our 
  thoughts remain with the victims of this tragedy, with their families and with the diverse spectators and athletes that comprise the Boston Marathon community. Although details of the investigation are still unfolding, it is apparent that electronic surveillance played an important role in locating and tracking the suspected perpetrators. This is as it should be. No one denies that electronic surveillance such as access to mobile phone location data is a valuable law enforcement tool and indeed, in horrific and rare events such as the Boston Marathon bombings, an essential one. That is why the ACLU has supported and continues to support an exemption in the law, permitting the immediate disclosure of location data to law enforcement agencies in such life and death situations. (Electronic Communications Privacy Act, Part II: Geolocation Privacy and Surveillance, House Hearing, Apr. 25, 2013, p. 32). 
  
RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING THE USE OF NATIONAL SECURITY LETTERS 
Affirmative cases dealing with National Security Letters (NSLs) will likely propose that the FBI or NSA secure a 
search warrant prior to the issuance of an NSL. But you will find evidence in this section of the National Debate Handbook showing that the current procedures for the use of NSLs are essential in terrorism investigations. According to Ellen Nakashima, a Washington Post staff writer, the number of NSLs issued by the FBI alone is about 20,000 per 
year: 
  For instance, the group urged Congress to amend the law so that national security letters (NSLs) can be 
  issued only upon a finding by a judge that the government has reasonable grounds to believe that the data sought are relevant to an authorized terrorism or intelligence investigation. Currently, NSLs can be issued by senior FBI officials in field offices, and officials warn that changing that would impede the bureau's ability to conduct preliminary investigations. The FBI issues more than 20,000 NSLs a year for data such as phone subscriber information and telephone toll records, as well as banking and credit card records. The data do not include phone-call content, which would require a court-approved warrant. (Washington Post, Jan. 8, 2014, p. 
  A2) 
  Since NSLs, by definition, involve sensitive national security matters, the court that would have to issue the 
warrants would be the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC). John Bates, a U.S. District Court Judge and a judge assigned to the FISC, warns that a warrant requirement for NSLs would be beyond the capabilities of the FISC: --Drastically expanding the FISC's caseload by assigning to it in excess of 20,000 administrative subpoena-type cases per year - even with a corresponding injection of resources and personnel - would fundamentally transform the nature of the FISC to the detriment of its current responsibilities‖ (Examining Recommendations to Reform FISA Authorities, House Hearing, Feb. 4, 2014, p. 196). 

RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING THE USE OF DRONE SURVEILLANCE 
Affirmative cases in the area will likely argue that the federal law enforcement agencies secure a search warrant 
prior to conducting drone surveillance of individuals, though some cases may also suggest limits on the use of private drones. Since the 2015-16 debate resolution calls for the federal government curtailing --its‖ domestic surveillance, how could it be topical for an affirmative team to propose limits on private drone use? The negative answer: the airspace may belong to the federal government, but if the drone is privately owned, the --surveillance‖ would still be done by an entity other than the federal government. In addition, the negative team can point out that the federal government control of airspace starts at 1,200 feet - state and local governments control the airspace below that level. Evidence for this statement comes from Timothy Takahashi, professor of aerospace engineering at Arizona State University: --The federal government regulates controlled airspace (classes A, B, C, D, and E) which are airspaces more than 1,200 feet above ground level‖ (Albany Government Law Review, 2015, pp. 90-91). Most drone surveillance devices would likely fly below the 1,200 foot federal range. Accordingly, state governments are adopting their own privacy ordinances. Professor Takahashi explains that drones typically fly in --Class G‖ airspace which is the province 
of state and local government control: 
  Provisions within the FAA Modernization and Reform Act of 2012 raise Tenth Amendment, commerce 
  authority, and public safety concerns. Most importantly, the Reform Act does not amend the overall policy of the agency. The FAA is expected to continue to --[assign] and [maintain] safety as the highest priority in air 
  commerce‖ and to --[regulate] air commerce in a way that best promotes safety and fulfills national defense 
  
  9
  
  
  requirements.‖ The Reform Act commands the agency to insert itself into activities outside of its traditional 
  domain, such as the regulation of flight in Class --G‖ airspace, which is typically the province of state and local 
  governments. (Albany Government Law Review, 2015, p. 82) 
Nate Vogel, legislative attorney for the New York Civil Liberties Union, points out that virtually every state is 
now taking action to establish standards for the use of drone aircraft: --Like with many other technologies that enable surveillance, there is a lively policy debate going on in the public about unmanned aircraft. The debate surrounding unmanned aircraft has a key feature that makes it attractive for an examination that focuses on legislation. The legislative debate about unmanned aircraft in state legislatures has recently exploded, with legislation introduced in almost every single state in the country in just a few years. Many states have seen more than one piece of legislation introduced‖ (Albany Government Law Review, 2015, pp. 211-212). 
Negative teams can also point out that drone surveillance offers many more advantages than disadvantages. Ryan 
Calo, professor of law at the University of Washington School of Law, points out that drone surveillance could serve a vital function in disaster relief operations: --The Federal Communications Commission is examining the use of UAS to help with communication relays in the event of a disaster to ensure emergency responders are able to communicate with each other. Following Hurricane Katrina, dozens of 911 call centers were knocked out of commission. UAS could help ensure connectivity until land-based communications are restored‖ (The Future of Drones in America: Law Enforcement and Privacy Considerations, Senate Hearing, Mar. 20, 2013, p. 102). Drones would also prove invaluable in terrorism investigations, fighting forest fires, conducting environmental assessments, wildlife management, among others. 

RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING THE GOVERNMENT'S USE OF BIOMETRIC IDENTIFICATION 
Affirmative cases dealing with the use of biometric surveillance are likely to focus on the ways that DNA 
databases discriminate against racial minorities. You will find evidence in this section of the National Debate Handbook showing that familial DNA searching has been useful in solving cold cases involving mass murders. Colin 
McFerrin, writing in the Texas Wesleyan Law Review, describes two such cases: 
  The cases of the --Bind, Torture, Kill‖ (BTK) serial killer and the --Grim Sleeper‖ killer are two prolific 
  examples of law enforcement and prosecutors using DNA evidence to identify - and eventually convict - suspects. In both cases, however, law enforcement identified their suspects using familial searching. In familial searching, law enforcement examines criminal DNA databases in an effort to identify the suspect, or a close relative of the suspect, by comparing the DNA profile of known offenders-arrestees with genetic evidence recovered from a crime scene. Familial searching recognizes the concept that individuals in a sibling or parent- child relationship share more genetic material with each other than with non-familial individuals due to the 
  DNA replication process discussed above. (Spring 2013, p. 973) 
  It should also be pointed out that DNA evidence is used to exonerate as well as to convict. William Staples, 
professor of sociology at the University of Kansas, is the author of the 2014 book, Everyday Surveillance: Vigilance and Visibility in Postmodern Life. Professor Staples describes the power of DNA data to exonerate: --According to the Innocence Project, a nonprofit legal clinic dedicated to exonerating wrongfully convicted people through DNA testing, there have been 297 post-conviction DNA exonerations in the United States; 186 African Americans, 84 European Americans, 21 Latinos, 2 Asian Americans, and 4 whose race is unknown. Seventeen of the 297 people exonerated through DNA served time on death row while the average length of time served by exonerees is thirteen years‖ (p 151). 
Critics of the use of DNA databases argue that they discriminate against members of racial minority groups. But, 
Colin McFerrin, J.D. candidate at Texas Wesleyan School of Law, points that the use of DNA is race-blind because it 
involves no subjective judgments: 
  In response to the racial equity concerns of familial DNA searching, Frederick Bieber, a medical geneticist 
  and Harvard Medical School associate professor of pathology, points out that DNA --is race blind.‖ This position is strengthened by Bieber's argument that familial searches are performed on every genetic profile, regardless of race or ethnicity, and that the investigator does not --know or care whether the owner of that DNA 
  is black, white, or green.‖ (Texas Wesleyan Law Review, Spr. 2013, p. 991) 
  
RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING SURVEILLANCE FROM CAMERAS 
Cameras in public places are becoming ubiquitous, allegedly leading to a loss of privacy. But you will find 
evidence in this section of the National Debate Handbook to show that camera surveillance is more beneficial than harmful. Intelligence analyst, Sylvia Longmire, points out that access to license plate reader data can be useful for 
detecting criminal behavior, sometimes involving kidnapping and terrorist activity: 
  Known most commonly by the acronym ALPR for Automatic License Plate Reader/Recognition, the units 
have been in use across the United States for some time. They're used to fine drivers who blow through toll 

10 


booths without paying, find kidnappers in --Amber Alert‖ situations, and track down stolen vehicles. They can 
also be used to find drivers with suspended licenses, no insurance, or multiple unpaid parking tickets. In some places, like New York, the volume of traffic is so high that the readers don't check every plate against a full database in real-time. Instead, the readers match scans up against a --hot list‖ of plates belonging to people who have committed a crime or violation. The hot list can contain any set of plate data, from terrorist watch lists, to stolen vehicles, to parking scofflaws. (Border Insecurity: Why Big Money, Fences and Drones Aren't Making 
Us Safer, 2014, p. 71) 
David Brin, holder of a Ph.D. in physics from the University of California at San Diego, reports that the ubiquity 

of cameras in public places assisted in the speedy identification of the Boston Marathon bombers: 
  Faster than Moore's law [that overall processing power for computers will double every two years], 
  cameras get cheaper, better, more mobile, more numerous and smaller each year. Your Google Glass --specs‖ may provoke strong objections today, while they resemble Borg [fictional alien race] implants. Tomorrow they'll look like normal sunglasses. A few years later, they will vanish into contact lenses. (Prototypes exist.) If laws banish such things, who will be thwarted? Only normal folk, while elites - government, corporate, wealth, criminal and foreign - will have the new omniscience. How do you propose stopping them? Indeed, should we? Recall how the Boston Marathon bombers were rapidly caught thanks to a ubiquity of cameras, 
  nearly all of them privately owned. (Domestic Surveillance, 2015, pp. 71-72) 
  Mass surveillance, facilitated by the use of cameras, can also be an alternative to the racial profiling so often 
associated with physical surveillance. Bennet Capers, professor of law at the Brooklyn Law School, explains how 
camera surveillance trades off with racial profiling practices: 
  Now consider the work camera surveillance can do to address these issues. First, take the racial profiling 
  of minority drivers. Cameras already monitor automated bridge and tunnel tolling systems, and photo-radars already catch red-light violations. But this is only the start. As Elizabeth Joh has explored, technology already exists to police almost all traffic violations. Dedicated short-range communications technology (DSRC) means that cars are increasingly being equipped to communicate pertinent data to other devices, including data regarding the car's location and speed, and warnings regarding the car's mechanics or registration. While DSRC is already being used to reduce collisions - by alerting a driver that another car is approaching, for example - this same technology can be used to generate automatic traffic tickets. Clearly, such automated surveillance has the potential to free police to focus on actual policing. But more importantly, it has the advantage of being racially neutral. Rather than using pretext stops to single out minority motorists, surveillance technology will --ticket‖ without regard to race. I have argued in other work that racial profiling does more than simply impose a --racial tax,‖ as Randall Kennedy suggests. In fact, racial profiling, as a marker of inequality, is citizenship-diminishing. Cameras, by contrast, neither discriminate nor engage in arbitrary policing. They treat all traffic offenders alike and therefore are citizenship-enhancing. (Fordham 
  Urban Law Journal, Mar. 2013, pp. 984-985) 
  
RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING FDA SURVEILLANCE OF WHISTLEBLOWERS 
The controversy in this area relates to the recently disclosed practice at the Food and Drug Administration 
involving that agency's use of electronic surveillance of its own staff members. You will find evidence in this section of the National Debate Handbook to defend the right of federal agencies to monitor their own employees' use of government-owned computers. During the Congressional investigation of FDA monitoring, Jeanne Ireland, Assistant Commissioner of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, told members of Congress that staff members are notified 
every time they logon to their government-owned computer that monitoring is occurring: 
  Upon logging on to the FDA network, users immediately receive the following warning message: --You 
  ore accessing a U.S. Government information system, which includes (I) this computer, (2) this computer network, (3) ail computers connected to this network, and (4) all devices and storage media attached to this network or to a computer on this network. This information system is provided for U.S. Government- authorized use only. Unauthorized or improper use of this system may result in disciplinary action, as well as civil and criminal penalties. By using this information, you understand and consent to the following: You have no reasonable expectation of privacy regarding any communications or data transiting or stored on this information system. At any time, and for any lawful government purpose, the government may monitor, intercept, and search and seize any communication or data transiting or stored on this information system.‖ (Limitless Surveillance at the FDA: Protecting the Rights of Federal Whistle-Blowers, House Hearing, Feb. 
  26, 2014, p. 193) 
  If the FDA employees wished to have privacy in their contacts with members of Congress, they could simply have 
used their own personal computers. Assistant Commissioner Ireland's testimony indicated that nongovernment-owned computers were not subject to surveillance: --We can assure you, however, that the Agency did not monitor these 
individuals' use of nongovernment-owned computers. To the extent an individual elected to use a government 

11 


computer to engage in correspondence using a personal e-mail account, data derived from such use were collected in the same manner as were data derived from other uses of the government-issued computer‖ (Limitless Surveillance at the FDA: Protecting the Rights of Federal Whistle-Blowers, House Hearing, Feb. 26, 2014, p. 191). 

RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING THE SURVEILLANCE OF MUSLIM CHARITIES 
Affirmative cases in this area will propose that the U.S. Treasury Department and the FBI curtail their surveillance 
of Muslim charities. In 1996, Congress passed the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act (AEDPA) that, among other things, made it a crime to --knowingly provide material support or resources to a foreign terrorist organization.‖ You will find evidence in this issue of the National Debate Handbook to show that aggressive enforcement of the --material support‖ statute remains important in the war against terrorism. Adam Wallwork, writing in the Southern University Law Review, points out that terrorist organizations often succeed in blurring the lines between overt and covert support of their activities: --Combating terrorist financing is an essential element of United States and global counterterrorism efforts. International terrorist networks require funds to support their infrastructures. It takes money to recruit and train terrorists, procure weapons and safe-houses, pay for travel, support families of so- called ‗martyrs,' issue propaganda, and provide social services to win local support. Even small sums can be used to fund devastating attacks‖ (Fall 2013, p. 3). Terrorist groups often promise suicide bombers that their families will be financially rewarded after a successful attack. 
In their rulings upholding the --material support‖ statute, several courts have pointed out that terrorist funding is 
--fungible‖ - meaning that money given for apparently charitable purposes can free up funds that the terrorist group would otherwise have to spend for food and clothing. Malick Ghachem, professor of history at MIT, explains the meaning of --fungibility‖ as it applies to the --material support‖ statute: --The fungibility of money permits a designated organization to use money given for peaceful ends towards a terrorist objective, or simply to free up other funds that can be used to support terrorism. Coordinated political advocacy on behalf of an FTO [foreign terrorist organization], for its part, could facilitate the work of terrorism by raising the profile of the organization internationally and drawing additional support in the form of new recruits and funds‖ (First Amendment Law Review, Fall 2013, p. 161). 
Negative teams can also point out that federal enforcement of the --material support‖ statute is transparent in the 
sense that it targets specifically named terrorist organizations, thus giving clear notice to prospective donors. Sam Adelsberg, writing in the Harvard National Security Journal, says that prosecutions almost always involve one of three 
terrorist organizations: 
  A review of the cases also indicates that the material support statute is usually used to target support 
  provided to a limited group of recipients: organizations that the United States has unambiguously and publicly designated as terrorist organizations. Of the material support prosecutions brought between September 2001 and July 2007, for example, roughly one-third involved alleged material support provided to al-Qaeda. In a substantial proportion of the remaining prosecutions, the foreign terrorist organization involved was either 
  Hamas or FARC [a terrorist group in Colombia]. (2013, pp. 289-290) 
  
RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S PHYSICAL 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS 

RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING SURVEILLANCE IN MUSLIM COMMUNITIES 
Affirmative cases in this area will likely propose that the Federal Bureau of Investigation abandon its aggressive 
provocateur strategy in Muslim communities. You will find evidence in this section of the National Debate Handbook that the FBI's use of informants in Muslim communities offers an appropriate response to the level of the threat. Michael McCaul, chair of the House Committee on Homeland Security, reports that hundreds of American Muslims 
return to U.S. communities after fighting with ISIS or al-Shabaab terrorists in Syria or Africa: 
  More than a hundred Americans are fighting overseas supporting terrorism, from the Middle East and 
  Syria, or to Africa and Somalia. Individuals in our own communities are being recruited by organizations like al-Shabaab. These individuals directly undermine our homeland security. They have been recruited inside the United States, have left and could potentially return, presenting a vast vulnerability in our counterterrorism efforts. Overseas, while fighting and supporting terrorists, they receive military training, combat experience, and grow their jihadist network. Coming back with these skills and connections extends a spider web of extremism into our own backyards. (From Al-Shabaab to Al-Nusra: How Westerners Joining Terror Groups 
  Overseas Affect the Homeland, House Hearings, Oct. 9, 2013, p. 2) 
  As pointed out by Connecticut Senator, Joseph Lieberman, homegrown terrorists have been involved in some of 
the most lethal terrorist attacks since 9/11: --The most lethal threats or attacks on our homeland have actually been carried out, as we know, by homegrown terrorists: Nidal Malik Hasan at Fort Hood and Carlos Bledsoe at the Army 
recruiting station in Little Rock. But the battle goes on, and it is hard to reach a conclusion other than it will go on for a 

12 

long time‖ (Homeland Threats and Agency Responses, Senate Hearing, Sept. 19, 2012, p. 2). 
Rudolph Giuliani, mayor of New York City during the 9/11 attacks, believes that electronic surveillance alone is 
insufficient to identify terrorist threats; only human intelligence involving the use of informants can provide the level 
of security required: 
  No matter how new, or how different, this threat of homeland terrorism is, the most important thing for us 
  to continue to develop at home and abroad is human intelligence. One of the risks of gathering so much information through advanced technology is that it tends to gives us a false sense of security. The large volume of electronic data collected every day is of no use if the few items of relevant information can't be separated from the much larger volume of irrelevant information. The most useful source of information that allows our analysts to develop the key words and phrases and numbers to highlight and focus on is the information gathered through human intelligence - informants and undercover agents. We must constantly develop human intelligence sources. (Attacks on the Homeland, House Hearing, May 9, 2013, p. 93). 
  
RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING SURVEILLANCE BY THE TSA 
Affirmative cases dealing with the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) will likely either propose 
restricting certain screening processes (such as the use of Advanced Imaging Technology (AIT) machines) or privatizing airport passenger screening altogether. You will find evidence in this section of the National Debate Handbook to answer both of these cases. John Sanders, Assistant Administrator of the TSA explained the advantages of AIT screening machines over simple walk-through metal detectors: --TSA works with the private industry to develop and deploy the best technology available to detect metallic and nonmetallic threats, such as the explosive devices used by the underwear bomber on Christmas day 2009 and the improved device discovered in the disrupted plot this past May. These are threats that walk-through metal detectors cannot detect‖ (TSA's Recent Scanner Shuffle: Real Strategy or Wasteful Smokescreen?, House Hearing, Nov. 15, 2012, pp. 7-8). The privacy implications of AIT scanners are minimal because all such scanners are now designed so as to present only a generic cartoon outline of a human body while still identifying the locations of threatening items in need of closer inspection. Brittany Stancombe describes this process in the Cumberland Law Review: --The new machines, unlike the full-body scanners previously used in airports across the United States, do not produce passenger-specific images but rather indicate the position of potentially harmful items on generic outlines of people. The software used on AIT machines at airports, referred to as Automated Target Software (ATR), does not include the ability to store the images‖ (2012, pp. 196-197). 
Evidence is also available to answer the case proposing privatization of airport screening. John Gage, president of 
the American Federation of Government Employees, points out that the TSA should be given credit for the fact that our nation has not experienced a successful airline-based terrorist incident since 9/11: --After the terrorist attacks on 9/11, America learned that the system of private screening companies and the private screeners in place on that fateful day were incompetent to perform the task of keeping terrorists off our passenger aircraft. As a result, Congress Federalized airport screening in recognition that the job of screening airline passengers and maintaining the security of the commercial aviation system was fundamental to our security as a Nation. Since then, our skies have been kept safe, despite constant threats‖ (Screening Partnership Program, House Hearing, Feb. 16, 2012, pp. 40-41). Gage also points out that airports have always been able to privatize their passenger screening, yet few have chosen to do so: --Airports have had the ability to "opt out" of the Federal screener system since TSA was created, but in those 10 years only a handful of 450 have chosen to do so. Opting out means opting in to the lowest bidder, which is not how homeland security should operate. It is too important to be left to companies that would not be accountable to the American people. There is no contracting out of the Secret Service, FBI, Border Patrol, Customs and Border Protection Officers, or the Capitol Police who protect Members of Congress and their staffs‖ (Screening Partnership Program, House Hearing, Feb. 16, 2012, pp. 41). 

RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING SURVEILLANCE OF IMMIGRANTS 
Affirmative cases in the area of immigration surveillance might propose relaxing immigration surveillance at the 
border or limiting the use of home and workplace raids. You will find evidence in this section of the National Debate Handbook to show that immigration enforcement is vital to Homeland Security as well as to the future of immigration reform in Congress. Some affirmative cases will claim that strong enforcement measures at the border simply push 
immigrants to remote regions for crossing where they are more likely to die in the process. The implication is that the U.S. should abandon border enforcement altogether so that persons would not have to face dangers when crossing our borders illegally. Such a proposal would open our nation to a far greater danger, as explained by James Comey, 
Director of the FBI: --The federal government protects 7,000 miles of U.S. land border and 95,000 miles of shoreline. Every day, more than a million visitors enter the country through one of 327 official ports of entry along the Mexican and Canadian borders, as well as through seaports and international airports. Any corruption at the border enables a wide range of illegal activities, potentially placing the entire nation at risk by letting drugs, guns, money, and weapons 
of mass destruction slip into the country, along with criminals, terrorists, and spies‖ (Federal Bureau of Investigation, 
House Hearing, June 11, 2014, p. 15). 

  13 
  
  
While home and workplace raids do create hardships for undocumented immigrants, a failure to enforce U.S. immigration laws would be unfair to immigrants that follow the rules. James Rohrbacher, a U.S. Representative from California, observed that --rewarding immigration law violators is a betrayal of the trust Americans place in our government. It is utterly unfair to those who play by the rules in coming here. Citizenship for millions who are here unlawfully and legal status for millions more not eligible for citizenship would retroactively nullify the consent Americans gave to the current legitimate immigration law and policy of our nation that have been in effect for decades‖ (Orange County Register, Aug. 12, 2013, Nexis). As a practical political matter, abandoning immigration enforcement will doom any immigration reform designed to broaden the path to citizenship. Daniel Morales discusses this political reality in the July 2013 issue of the Northwestern University Law Review Colloquy: --Comprehensive immigration reform law will emerge - if at all - from the following bargain: conservatives will agree to legalize millions of --illegal‖ immigrants in exchange for liberals' agreement to more robust immigration enforcement measures‖ (p. 36). 

RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING THE SURVEILLANCE POWERS OF THE U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
The most likely affirmative case dealing with the surveillance conducted by the U.S. Bureau of the Census will 
limit the Census Bureau's use of the American Community Survey. Whereas the official U.S. census is conducted every ten years, the American Community Survey (ACS) happens monthly. Kenneth Prewitt, a resident fellow at the Russell Sage Foundation, describes this process in his 2013 book, What Is Your Race?: The Census and Our Flawed Efforts to Classify Americans: --The ACS is based on a sample, as the long form [of the 10-year census] had been. But the ACS differs in being administered on a continuous basis -- approximately 250,000 households every month, or three million households every year. The information from one year of the ACS sample provides statistical estimates for all levels of geography -- states, metropolitan areas, counties, cities, and rural areas for jurisdictions or areas of at least 65,000‖ (p. 173). 
Critics of the ACS argue that the questions are overly intrusive and that completion of the form is mandatory, as 
enforced by significant legal penalties. Attorney, John Rutherford, explains his objections to the intrusiveness of the survey: --As if the survey's asinine questions and highly detailed inquiries into your financial affairs weren't bad enough, you're also expected to violate the privacy of others by supplying the names and addresses of your friends, relatives and employer. And the questionnaire stipulates that you provide such information on the people in your home as their educational levels, how many years of schooling they completed, what languages they speak and when they last worked at a job, among other things‖ (U.S. Census, 2012, p. 33). Trey Gowdy, U.S. Representative from South Carolina, testifying at a House hearing entitled, The Pros and Cons of Making the Census Bureau's American Community Survey Voluntary, describes the penalties for failure to complete the ACS: --A sample of questions include inquiries on healthcare plans, the number of times the recipient has been married and whether or not the recipient has a mortgage and if they do, how much they pay each month on the mortgage. Not content with merely asking the questions, the Federal Government aggressively pursues recipients with phone calls, visits and threats of fines and jail time for noncompliance‖ (Mar. 6, 2012, p. 23). 
The solution suggested by critics of the ACS is to make the survey voluntary. An example of such a proposal is 
explained by Ted Poe, U.S. Representative from Texas: 
  I am here to suggest that the Federal Government however, does not have an overriding, compelling 
  interest to force people to divulge their private matters in this survey. The survey should be voluntary. Congress should prohibit the Federal Government from forcing Americans to provide this information such as what time they leave for work in the morning and what time they come home. People are subject to repeated harassment by contracted agents who threaten them with fines for not complying with the survey. (The Pros 
  and Cons of Making the Census Bureau's American Community Survey Voluntary, Mar. 6, 2012, p. 19) 
  
RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING SURVEILLANCE OF ATTORNEY-CLIENT COMMUNICATION 
Affirmative cases dealing with attorney-client communication would argue that NSA or FBI surveillance of attorney- 
client communication is an impermissible use of federal authority. You will find evidence in this section of the National Debate Handbook showing that monitoring of attorney-client communication is limited to terrorism suspects receiving a special designation from the U.S. Attorney General. In most instances, those terrorism suspects are held in detention at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, thus raising an interesting question as to whether this involves --domestic 
surveillance.‖ 
The only publicly available example of the federal government's use of intercepted attorney-client communication 
involves the 2005 conviction of defense attorney, Lynne Stewart. Stewart was the defense attorney for Omar Abdel Rahman, a Muslim religious leader who was convicted for his involvement with the first bombing of the World Trade Center. The offense for which Lynne Stewart was convicted was described by Independent Institute analyst, Michelle 
Malkin, in 2013: 
Stewart was convicted in 2005 of helping terrorist Omar Abdel Rahman - the murderous Blind Sheik - 

14 


smuggle coded messages of Islamic violence to outside followers in violation of an explicit pledge to abide by her client's court-ordered isolation. Rahman, Stewart's --political client,‖ had called on Muslims to --destroy‖ the West, --burn their companies, eliminate their interests, sink their ships, shoot down their planes, kill them on the sea, air or land.‖ He issued bloody fatwas against U.S. --infidels‖ that inspired the 1993 WTC bombing, the 1997 massacre of Western tourists in Luxor, Egypt, and the 9/11 attacks. (Feb. 7, 2013, http://michelle  [HYPERLINK: http://michelle/]
malkin.com/2014/02/07/the-lefts-valentine-to-defiant-jihad-enabler-lynne-stewart/) 
According to Rachel Simon, writing in the Seton Hall Law Review, the surveillance of attorney-client 

conversations is limited to the specific purpose of ensuring that an attorney is not a participant in the criminal activity 
for which the client is accused: 
  While privileged communications are inadmissible at trial, law enforcement officers are not entirely 
  prohibited from intercepting telephone conversations between attorney and client under the Wiretap Act. Section 2518(5) requires that electronic eavesdropping be conducted "in such a way as to minimize the interception of communications not otherwise subject to interception," including privileged and, presumably, 
  constitutionally-protected communications. Nevertheless, law enforcement officers who have 	lawfully 
  established a wiretap can monitor attorney-client communications to the extent necessary to determine that the attorney is not participating in criminal activity along with the subject of their investigation. This is known as 
  the "crime fraud exception." (2015, p. 361) 
  
RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING DRUG SURVEILLANCE 
Affirmative cases dealing with drug surveillance will likely claim that the U.S. should declare an end to the failed 
--war on drugs.‖ The key question for all such affirmative cases is whether --drug legalization‖ - or even --decriminalization‖ - is topical under the wording of the 2015-16 resolution. You will also find evidence in this section of the National Debate Handbook to show that drug enforcement - especially marijuana enforcement - is not a major cause of prison crowding or drug cartel violence. Jonathan Caulkins, professor of public policy at Carnegie Mellon University, debunks the theory that marijuana enforcement is mostly responsible for prison crowding: --Would legalizing marijuana at least cut in half the number of drug law violators behind bars? Again, no; not even close. University of South Carolina criminologist Eric Sevigny estimates that only about 8 percent of state and federal prison inmates serving time for drug law violations were marijuana-only offenders‖ (Marijuana Legalization: What Everyone Needs to Know, 2012, p. 129). 
Similarly, the notion that stopping U.S. drug enforcement would significantly diminish the criminal activities of 
Mexican drug cartels is misguided. These criminal syndicates will continue to operate so long as Mexican law enforcement allows them to do so. As Paul Kan, professor of military studies at the U.S. Army War College, points out, the cartels have many non-drug-related ways to make money so long as their smuggling routes are left undisturbed: --With well-established smuggling routes in place, cartels can turn their networks toward other illicit trade unrelated to drugs. Human trafficking, for example, is a lucrative trade whose profits are competitive with illicit narcotics‖ (Cartels at War: Mexico's Drug-Fueled Violence and the Threat to U.S. National Security, 2012, p. 136). 
Putting a stop to law enforcement surveillance of drug offers a highly disadvantageous option; in the effort to 
abandon the drug war, such a policy would also turn a blind eye to the many other illicit uses of drug smuggling routes. Halting such enforcement efforts would create an opening for terrorist organizations to smuggle persons or weapons into the United States. Paul Stockton, U.S. Undersecretary of Defense for Homeland Security, describes this threat in a Hearing before the House Homeland Security Committee: --Drug trafficking and related transnational organized crime presents a significant threat to our Nation. The movement of large amounts of drugs across our borders is the most immediate concern, but the potential for these drug smuggling networks to be used for infiltrating terrorists and weapons of mass destruction cannot be discounted. As such, countering drug trafficking across our borders and around the world is a national priority‖ (Boots on the Ground or Eyes in the Sky, Apr. 17, 2012, p. 8). 

RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING SURVEILLANCE THROUGH STANDARDIZED TESTING 
Affirmative cases dealing with educational surveillance will argue that the federal government's passage in 2002 
of --No Child Left Behind‖ has ushered in a harmful system of high-stakes standardized testing. Yet standardized testing has many defenders within the field of educational administration, in government, and among parent groups. You will find evidence in this section of the National Debate Handbook to answer each of the charges made against standardized testing. Standardized tests boost student achievement, serve as an accurate predictor of college success, facilitate teacher collaboration, focus federal spending on schools most in need of improvement, promote fairness and uniformity in assessment, and aid educational decision making and accountability. Standardized testing also best prepares students for --real life‖ assessments that will typically involve standardized testing for professional licensing for almost any career field ranging from nursing to professional truck driving. Celine Coggins, the CEO of TeachPlus, 
points out that standardized testing is neither inherently good or bad: 
Tests are not inherently damaging to instruction. In fact, a good test will improve student outcomes by 



  helping teachers target instruction. And effective tests are surely necessary to gauge student progress. The imperative then is not to eliminate testing; it is to make sure that tests are aligned with meaningful curriculum, rigorous standards, and useful professional development - and that teachers are involved in the test adoption 
  process. (Christian Science Monitor, Apr. 3, 2014, Nexis) 
  
RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING SURVEILLANCE POWERS OF THE IRS 
15 

The most likely affirmative case dealing with IRS surveillance will focus on the recent abuses involving special 
scrutiny given to the tax exempt status of politically conservative groups. Yet the IRS targeting scandal demonstrated that the system worked exactly as it should have acted under the circumstances. When conservative political groups reported that they were being unfairly targeted by the IRS, an official investigation was launched, the factual background was established, and remedial action was taken to ensure that such abuse would not happen again. The report of the U.S. Inspector General's office was highly embarrassing to the IRS and the Obama administration in general. The Inspector General's report resulted in the resignations of the head of the Cincinnati IRS office - the particular office guilty of the abuses - as well as the Commissioner of the IRS, Steven Miller. The new IRS Commissioner, John Koskinen, described the steps that his office took to make certain that such targeting would not be 
tolerated: 
  I am pleased to report to you that the IRS has made significant progress in addressing the issues and 
  concerns with the 501(c)(4) determinations process. First of all, we have been responding to the recommendations made by the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration. It was the inspector general's report in May of last year that found applications for 501(c)(4) status had been screened using inappropriate criteria. As of late January of this year, we completed action on all nine of the inspector general's recommendations. Our actions have included reducing the inventory of 501(c)(4) applications, including the group of 145 cases in the so-called priority backlog, that is, those that were pending for more than 120 days on or before May 2013. As of this month, 126 of those cases have been closed, including 98 that were approved. Of those 98, 43 took advantage of a self-certification procedure re-offered last year. (Examining the IRS 
  Response to the Targeting Scandal, House Committee on Oversight Hearing, Mar. 26, 2014, p. 8) 
  
RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING MEDICAL SURVEILLANCE 
Affirmative cases dealing with medical surveillance may focus narrowly on problems with the administration of 
the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) or more broadly on the government's management of digital medical records. The implementation of the Affordable Care Act Website (HealthCare.gov) was highly problematic, involving numerous crashes and new beginnings. Republicans in Congress, always looking for any opportunity to criticize Obamacare, have argued that the inattention to the security of the HealthCare.gov Website should be a concern to all Americans. Yet computer experts testifying before Congress have pointed out that HealthCare.gov does not ask intrusive health questions and creates no permanent storage of health-related information. Indeed, the core idea of Obamacare is that all persons are eligible for health insurance coverage regardless of any pre-existing medical condition. 
Other affirmative cases dealing with medical surveillance could argue that federal programs promoting digitized 
medical records have enabled privacy intrusions for persons with HIV/AIDS or other serious or stigmatizing illnesses. While it is true that the federal government has promoted the transition to digital medical records, the government has also instituted strict medical privacy standards through the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and other legislation. Moreover, the benefits of digital medical records are substantial, including reduced medical errors, promotion of vital medical research, and speedy identification of disease epidemics. 

RESPONSES TO CASES CURTAILING WELFARE SURVEILLANCE 
The affirmative case argues that welfare recipients are subject to overly-intrusive home searches. But virtually all 
such surveillance is conducted by state and local welfare officials, not the federal government. Michelle Gilman, professor of law at the University of Baltimore School of Law, is a critic of welfare surveillance. But she points out that --welfare administration is highly devolved in that states and localities have great discretion in how they structure their welfare programs‖ (Brooklyn Law Review, Summer 2012, p. 1391). State governments provide a substantial portion of the funding for welfare programs and typically establish their own enforcement rules. 
But negative teams can also point out that welfare fraud actually is a serious problem, amounting to over $50 
billion per year, according to an estimate provided by Federal Safety Net (http://federalsafetynet.com/welfare-fraud.html,  [HYPERLINK: http://federalsafetynet.com/welfare-fraud.html]2015). Welfare fraud primarily harms legitimate recipients of welfare by unduly limiting the resources made available to those truly in need. 

16 


GENERIC AND SPECIFIC DISADVANTAGES 

GROWTH BAD DISADVANTAGE 
The thesis of this disadvantage is economic growth is bad. Currently the global economy is at a crossroads 
between trying to reestablish the old model for growth or switching to a new model that is more sustainable. The plan would boost the economy removing the impetus to make tough choices in terms of the structure of the economy. Growth that occurs under the usual model is environmentally unsustainable and threatens extinction. 

COURT CAPITAL DISADVANTAGE 
The thesis of this disadvantage is the Supreme Court has a limited capacity to make controversial decisions. The 
Supreme Court is planning to make a controversial ruling in the case of Zivitosky vs. Kerry by ruling against the government. However, the plan would also be a controversial ruling if it involved the judiciary. This forces the Court to make a more conservative ruling in Zivitosky and rule for the government. This gives the president too much power, which is bad. 

COURT LEGITIMACY DISADVANTAGE 
The thesis of this disadvantage is that controversial court rulings trigger backlash among the public and other 
branches of the government. In the context of this disadvantage, backlash will materializes in the form of budget cuts which make the judiciary unable to function. A functioning judiciary is necessary to stop dangerous oil projects. 

HUMAN RIGHTS CREDIBILITY DISADVANTAGE 
The thesis of this disadvantage is that increasing U.S. human rights credibility is bad. Reforming domestic 
surveillance would increase U.S. influence in the area of human rights. This would lead the U.S. to begin pressuring China on human rights issues. This undermines Chinese soft power, which is necessary to resolve a host of impacts relating to Asia. 

INTERNET REGULATION DISADVANTAGE 
This disadvantage is designed for affirmatives that either (1) have an international body help protect privacy or (2) 
pass a lot of government regulations concerning the Internet to curtail surveillance. The thesis is that private-led governance of the Internet is happening now, is sufficient to protect privacy, and will foster innovation and liberalization later on. Centralized regulation of the Internet harms this dynamic. Internet innovation is key to solving a host of impacts such as health care, climate change and economic growth. 

US LEADERSHIP DISADVANTAGE 
The thesis of this disadvantage is that U.S. global leadership is bad. Currently the U.S. is in the process of shifting 
to a less engaged grand strategy. The plan reinfuses the U.S. post Cold War grand strategy of deep engagement. Plans that solve technological leadership, soft power and/or economic growth link to this disadvantage. U.S. leadership is bad because it increases the propensity for conflict, encourages nuclear proliferation, increases international terrorism, and prevents effective multilateralism. 

POLITICS AGENDA DISADVANTAGE 
The thesis of this disadvantage is that the controversial nature of the plan prevents Obama from using his political 
capital to help pass trade promotion authority. This disadvantage applies to almost every affirmative plan. The negative can also argue that Republican Party unity is necessary for trade promotion authority, and surveillance reform fractures that unity. Trade promotion authority is necessary for many impacts relating to Asia, trade and the economy. 

INTERNET LIBERALIZATION DISADVANTAGE 
The thesis of this disadvantage is that Internet liberalization is bad. Russia, Iran and China are using Internet 
censorship to quell domestic dissidents. The plan would restore the U.S. ability to pressure these countries. Without domestic censorship the regimes currently governing Russia and China would be imperiled. If Iran were to cease Internet censorship, it would disrupt the political dynamic which is bolstering a U.S.-Iranian nuclear deal. 

TERRORISM DISADVANTAGE 
The thesis of this disadvantage is the plan undermines the fight against terrorism. This applies to legislative and 
judiciary affirmatives. Almost every affirmative plan arguably disrupts the fight against terrorism in some way. There are multiple types of terrorism impacts, including cyber, nuclear and bioterrorism. 

  THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	17 
  N e g a ti v e I n d e x 
  
TERMS 
I. TERMS OF THE TOPIC ARE DEFINED. 
 A. --United States federal government‖ is defined. (1-3) 
 B. --Substantially‖ is defined. 
1. --Substantial‖ means the --essential‖ part of something. 
 (4-5) 
 2. --Substantial‖ means --to a great extent.‖ (6-7) 
 3. --Substantial‖ means --large.‖ (8) 
 4. --Substantial‖ means --of great importance.‖ (9) 
 5. --Substantial‖ means --valuable.‖ (10-11) 
 6. --Substantial‖ means permanent as opposed to temporary. 
 (1 2 ) 
7. --Substantial‖ means relating to the --fundamental 
 substance‖ of a thing. (13) 
8. --Substantial‖ means of a --corporeal or material nature.‖ 
 (1 4 ) 
 9. --Substantially‖ means more than 25%. (15) 
 10. A reduction of less than 15% is not substantial. (16) 11. --Substantial‖ amount refers to a large percentage of 
 change. (17-19) 
12. Procedural changes are different from --substantial‖ 
 o ne s . ( 2 0 ) 
13. Restrictions on metadata collection should not be 
 considered --substantial.‖ (21) 
C. --Curtail‖ is defined. 
 1. --Curtail‖ means to cut short or reduce. (22-24) 
 2. --Curtail‖ means to limit. (25) 
 3. --Curtail‖ means to reduce the quantity of something. 
 (26-27) 
 4. --Curtail‖ cannot be interpreted as --to abolish.‖ (28) 
D. --Its‖ is defined. 
1. --Its‖ means belonging to the thing previously mentioned. 
 (2 9 ) 
2. --Its‖ means --relating to itself‖ or --possessing‖ 
 something. (30) 
 3. --Its‖ means --belonging to.‖ (31-32) 
E. --Domestic‖ is defined. 
1. --Domestic‖ means of or relating to one's own country. 
 (33-35) 
2. --Domestic‖ means having to do with one's home. (36- 
 37) 
3. --Domestic‖ means relating to the internal affairs of a 
 country. (38-39) 
4. --Domestic‖ means produced in or indigenous to one's 
 own country. (40-41) 
 5. --Domestic‖ means the opposite of --foreign.‖ (42) 
F. --Surveillance‖ is defined. 
1. --Surveillance‖ is defined in the Foreign Intelligence 
  Surveillance Act as --the acquisition by an electronic, 
  mechanical, or other surveillance device of the contents 
  of any wire communication.‖ (43) 
2. --Surveillance‖ is defined etymologically as --to watch 
 from above.‖ (44-45) 
3. --Surveillance‖ means to watch people. (46-53) 
 4. --Surveillance‖ means constant observation. (54-59) 
 5. --Surveillance‖ can refer to the collection of DNA data. 
 (6 0 ) 
6. --Surveillance‖ can refer to the use of drug and alcohol 
 testing as well as the use of a lie detector. (61) 
7. --Surveillance‖ refers to government sanctioned 
 restrictions on liberty. (62) 
8. --Surveillance‖ is distinguished from the collection of 
 data. (63) 
8. --Surveillance‖ refers to something other than the 
 issuance of National Security Letters. (64) 
9. --Surveillance‖ includes the making of --Terry Stops.‖ 
 (6 5 ) 
10. --Surveillance‖ does not include the mere collection of 
data. (66) 


ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING THE 
  FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S ELECTRONIC 
  SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS 
I. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING NSA 
 SURVEILLANCE POWERS 
A. The harms of NSA surveillance are exaggerated. 
1. The harms to privacy are exaggerated. 
a. Privacy is a vague concept with uncertain 
  Constitutional standing. (67-68) 
b. The Fourth Amendment does not really apply when 
  there is no criminal prosecution. (69) 
c. U.S. persons are seldom targeted by NSA surveillance. 
  (7 0 ) 
  d. Privacy is not as important as security. (71-72) 
  e. There is no evidence that free speech has been chilled 
  by NSA surveillance. (73-77) 
f. No actual abuses of privacy have been found by critics 
  of the NSA. (78-82) 
g. Innocent persons have little reason to worry about NSA 
  surveillance. (83) 
h. There have been few actual searches of NSA databases 
  involving domestic surveillance. (84) 
i. If another terrorist attack is allowed to happen, the 
  impact on privacy will be devastating. (85-88) 
j. The U.S. is a far better protector of civil liberties than 
   any of the other countries now criticizing the NSA. 
   (8 9 ) 
2. The economic harms from NSA revelations are 
 exaggerated. (90-91) 
3. The U.S. must take care not to over-react to the Snowden 
 revelations. (92-99) 
4. The --panopticon‖ analogy has been misapplied. (100- 
 104) 
B. NSA surveillance is justified. 
1. President Obama came into office as a strong critic of 
  NSA surveillance, but became convinced of the 
  necessity due to the terrorist threat. (105-107) 
  
  
18 	THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 
N e g a ti v e I n d e x 

 2. Surveillance is essential. 
 a. The survival of the nation depends on good 
  intelligence. (108) 
 b. Surveillance contributes to our nation's security. (109- 
  110) 
  c. Surveillance contributes to safety. (111-113) 
  d. Surveillance saves lives. (114) 
  e. More than 80% of information that we have about 
  terrorists comes from surveillance. (115) 
  f. Surveillance is essential to good decision making. (116) 
  g. Most surveillance is non-threatening. (117) 
  h. Intelligence collection goes back to the founding of the 
 Republic. (118) 
 3. Human intelligence is more expensive than electronic 
 collection. (119) 
 4. Criticism from U.S. allies does not justify restrictions on 
  the NSA. 
  a. The U.S. does surveillance with its allies. (120-121) 
  b. Surveillance of U.S. allies is justified. (122) 
  c. Criticism from allies is hypocritical; they do the same 
 thing. (123-130) 
 5. NSA contractors generally do a good job. (131) 
 6. The --lone wolf‖ provision built into the Intelligence 
  Reform and Terrorism Protection Act (IRTPA) is an 
  important tool against terrorism. (132-133) 
 7. NSA secrecy is justified. 
 a. Some successes against terrorism cannot be disclosed 
  in order to tip off the terrorists. (134) 
  b. Secrecy is often a matter of national survival. (135) 
  c. Greater transparency provides a roadmap for terrorists. 
 (136-137) 
 8. Surveillance deters terrorists; one should not look simply 
  at the number of terrorists who have been caught by surveillance. That leaves out those who are deterred. 
  (138-139) 
 9. Complete transparency is impossible. (140-141) 
 10. The use of roving wiretaps is justified. (142-145) 
 11. The scale of the terrorist threat justifies NSA 
  surveillance. 
 a. Intelligence collection is essential to our survival. (146- 
  150) 
 b. The FISA Amendments Act is justified by the level of 
  the terrorist threat. (151) 
 c. Just one mistake in identifying a terrorist plot is one too 
  many. (152-154) 
 d. Providing for security of the nation is the primary 
  responsibility of the U.S. president. (155-161) 
 e. Law enforcement solutions are inadequate; terrorists 
  must be stopped before they act. (162) 
 f. Surveillance has been generally effective in stopping 
  terrorism. (163-171) 
 g. Specific examples of the value of Sections 215 and 702 
  in stopping terrorism are available. (172-173) 
 h. Monitoring of the Internet is essential to stopping 
 terrorists. (174-178) 
12. Section 702 of the PATRIOT Act has proven its value 
 in stopping terrorist acts. (179-200) 
13. NSA data mining capability is needed to sort through 
the haystack to find terrorist threats. (201-202) 
C. The terrorist threat is significant. 
1. The extent of the terrorist threat is significant. 
 a. Al Qaeda remains a threat. (203-213) 
 b. AQAP intends to attack the U.S. homeland. (214) 
 c. The Boston Marathon bombing illustrates the need for 
 vigilance. (215-216) 
 d. The terrorist threat is increasing. (217-256) 
 e. The threat from ISIS brings a new and more 
threatening dimension to terrorism. 
1. ISIS has access to massive resources. (257-261) 
 2. ISIS terrorism threatens the U.S. (262-277) 
f. State sponsored terrorism from Iran and its support for 
 Hezbollah remains a significant threat. (278-290) 
g. Terrorists are succeeding in gaining converts in 
 Western nations. (291) 
 h. Sleeper cells exist in the U.S. (292) 
 i. Al-Shabaab terrorists in Somalia are a threat to the U.S. 
 (293-294) 
2. The impact of terrorism threatens U.S. national security. 
a. Terrorists are attempting to acquire weapons of mass 
 destruction. (295-299) 
 b. Nuclear terrorism is a significant threat. (300-316) 
 c. The threat of terrorist use of biological weapons is 
 significant. (317-332) 
d. The threat of terrorist use of chemical weapons is 
 significant. (333-334) 
e. The threat from --lone wolf‖ terrorism is significant. 
 (335-353) 
 f. The economic impact of terrorism is significant. (354) 
 g. Given the scale of potential impacts, the precautionary 
  principle should be applied in the preparations against 
  terrorism - we cannot afford to be wrong. (355-358) 
3. There are many dimensions to the terrorist threat. 
a. Terror groups switch tactics whenever they sense a 
 w ea k n es s. (3 5 9 ) 
 b. Radicalization within prisons is a threat. (360-361) 
 c. Right wing terrorism is also a threat. (362-366) 
 d. Terrorist plots are inexpensive, adding new dimensions 
 to the threat. (367-368) 
e. The terrorist threat has diversified with the splintering 
 o f a l - Q a e da . ( 3 6 9 ) 
f. Foreign fighters returning home from Syria and 
  Somalia create reason to worry about terrorists 
  entering the U.S. (370-375) 
 4. The U.S. should not be blamed for the rise of terrorism. 
 a. Poverty is not the cause of terrorism. (376-377) 
 b. U.S. foreign policy should not be blamed for terrorism. 
 (3 7 8 ) 
c. There is never a justification for terrorist tactics 
slaughtering innocent people. (379) 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	19 
 N e g a ti v e I n d e x 
 
5. The many dimensions of the terrorist threat require a 
 response from the U.S. intelligence community. 
a. Complacency on the terrorist threat is an unacceptable 
 response. (380) 
b. Terrorism cannot be deterred; it must be prevented - 
 they are willing to commit suicide attacks. (381) 
 c. Domestic surveillance is essential. (382-384) 
 d. Surveillance of the Internet is essential in the case of 
 --lone wolf‖ terrorists. (385-393) 
e. The Joint Terrorism Task Force approach is working. 
 (3 9 4 ) 
f. Operation Tripwire inspects purchase records to 
 identify items likely used by terrorists. (395) 
g. Given that the threat is real - not imaginary - --terror 
 talk‖ is useful. (396) 
 h. Biosurveillance is vitally important. (397) 
6. Surveillance is working against terrorism. 
 a. Attacks have been prevented. (398-416) 
 b. Terrorism financing has been disrupted, but continued 
vigilance is needed. (417) 
D. NSA surveillance operates within U.S. law. 
 1. PRISM is legal under U.S. law. (418) 
 2. Surveillance offers the --least restrictive means‖ of 
 identifying terrorist threats. (419) 
3. NSA requests for examination of data are narrow in 
 s c o pe . ( 4 2 0 ) 
4. The distinction between foreign and domestic 
surveillance is almost impossible to make. (421-422) 
E. Existing checks on the NSA are sufficient to prevent 
 a b u se s. 
 1. Generally, checks are sufficient. (423-428) 
 2. A warrant is required in order to target a U.S. person. 
 (4 2 9 ) 
3. Internal checks are in place in the Executive branch. 
 (430-436) 
4. The FISA Amendments Act provides checks on 
 surveillance. (437-440) 
 5. Congress provides checks on NSA surveillance. (441) 
 6. Section 702 of the PATRIOT Act has numerous checks 
 on NSA surveillance. (442) 
7. When mistakes are made, they are quickly corrected. 
 (443-444) 
8. The U.S. has more checks on surveillance than other 
 developed nations. (445-450) 
 9. PRISM is properly checked for abusive uses. (451) 
 10. The National Intelligence Priorities Network provides 
 p r o pe r c he c k s . ( 4 5 2 ) 
11. The FISA Court system provides proper checks. 
a. The FISA Court appointment system is explained. 
 (4 5 3 ) 
b. The FISA Court provides proper oversight; it should 
 not be characterized as a --rubber stamp.‖ (454-464) 
c. The FISA Court releases rulings whenever national 
  security would not be compromised in the process. 
  (4 6 5 ) 
d. FISA requires that minimization procedures be in place 
  to limit the impact on the civil liberties of U.S. 
  pe r s o n s . ( 4 6 6 ) 
e. Litigation holds the government accountable for 
 a b u se s . ( 4 6 7 ) 
f. Journalism shield laws protect journalists from undue 
 surveillance. (468-469) 
g. Orders for the production of business records must be 
 approved by a federal judge. (470) 
12. Encryption provides protection against disclosure. (471- 
 477) 
13. President Obama has recently instituted reforms 
  designed to check potential NSA surveillance abuses. 
  (478-479) 
F. Proposals to curtail the surveillance powers of the NSA are 
 misguided. 
1. Proposed reforms of the FISA Court system are 
 misguided. 
a. The Chief Justice should retain the right to appoint 
 FISA Court Judges. (480-482) 
b. Appointing opposing or privacy counsel to appear 
 before the FISA Court is a misguided idea. (483- 
c. Public disclosure of FISA Court decisions is 
 misguided. (489-495) 
d. The FISA Court already releases all decisions that it 
 reasonable can. (496-497) 
e. The FISA Court should not be overloaded by the 
 addition of a new warrant requirement. (498-500) 
f. Federal District Court Judge Leon's ruling on the 
  constitutionality of the PRISM program has been 
  stayed on appeal. (501) 
2. Restricting NSA surveillance power is unworkable. 
a. If you don't trust existing Congress or judicial checks 
 to limit the NSA, then nothing will work. (502-503) 
b. When an NSA program is ended, it can merely change 
 the name and create a new program. (504-509) 
c. If the NSA loses the power to engage in domestic 
  surveillance, it can simply get the information it needs 
  from allies in the --Five Eyes‖ alliance. (510-523) 
d. Adding meaningless --legalizing‖ measures serve no 
  purpose but to quell public criticism of the NSA - 
  such measures allow the NSA to hide behind the 
  claim that it is simply following the law. (524-526) 
3. Restricting NSA domestic surveillance is harmful. 
a. Re-erecting the --wall of separation‖ between foreign 
  and domestic surveillance will return us to the 
  problems that led to 9/11. (527-540) 
b. It is really illegitimate under international law to 
  establish privacy standards for U.S. citizens that are 
  more restrictive than for non-U.S. persons. (541) 
c. Ending NSA domestic surveillance breaks agreements 
  that the U.S. has with its allies, risking their continued 
  cooperation in the fight against terrorism. (542) 
d. Providing standing to challenge surveillance will result 
 in court clog. (543) 
e. Presidential appointment of FISC judges will 
u n de r m i n e j u d i c i a l i n de pe n d e n c e . ( 5 4 4 ) 


20 	THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 
N e g a ti v e I n d e x 

f. Losing domestic surveillance also means the loss of the 
  power to exonerate. (545-577) 
g. Surveillance also checks government power. (578-580) 
II. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING BULK DATA 
 COLLECTION AND STORAGE UNDER SECTION 215 
 OF THE PATRIOT ACT 
A. The harm from bulk collection of telephone metadata is 
 exaggerated. 
 1. Privacy is not impaired by bulk collection. (581-583) 
 2. Strict limits are imposed on accessing data in the 
 collection. (584-589) 
3. Metadata only is collected - not the actual content of the 
 communications. (590-595) 
4. Only a tiny amount of data is ever actually examined. 
 (596-597) 
5. Section 215 is commonly referred to as the --libraries‖ 
  collection provision, but it has never even been used to 
  request library records. (598) 
B. The NSA use of bulk data collection is justified in the war 
 o n t e r r o r is m . 
1. Domestic surveillance is critically important in the war 
 o n te r r o r is m . ( 5 9 9 ) 
2. Metadata collection is highly relevant to terrorism 
 investigation. (600-601) 
3. In order to find a needle in a haystack, you have to have 
 a haystack. (602) 
4. Surveillance of telephone metadata is critical in 
 identifying terrorist plots. (603-608) 
5. Section 215 could have stopped the 9/11 attacks. (609- 
 610) 
6. Bulk collection is essential to facilitate the speed 
 necessary in intelligence collection. (611) 
7. Bulk collection of telephone data has been a successful 
 tool in the war on terrorism. (612-617) 
8. Numerous court rulings have found that the NSA bulk 
  collection system is legal under the PATRIOT Act. 
  (618-622) 
C. Existing checks on NSA bulk collection of telephone 
 metadata are sufficient. 
 1. Numerous checks are in place. (623-626) 
 2. The FISA Court is no mere --rubber stamp.‖ (627) 
 3. Congressional checks are in place. (628) 
 4. TSA analysts are carefully screened to make sure they 
 are following the rules. (629) 
5. When problems are discovered, they are quickly 
 corrected. (630) 
6. Bulk collection of Internet data has already been 
 terminated. (631) 
7. State legislation protects the privacy of library records. 
 (6 3 2 ) 
8. The USA PATRIOT Improvement and Reauthorization 
  Act of 2005 provided new requirements for minimizing 
  the privacy intrusion of NSA surveillance. (633) 
9. The --gag order‖ provision of the PATRIOT Act has been 
lifted. (634-645) 
10. President Obama has eliminated the --third hop‖ in the 
 Section 215 surveillance process. (646-649) 
D. Proposals to curtail the NSA's bulk collection of metadata 
  will not solve the threat to the privacy of telephone m e t a da t a . 
1. The use of --stingray‖ devices to mimic the operation of 
  cellphone towers is not limited to government - private companies and even electronics hobbyists can intercept 
  this data. (650-675) 
2. The proposal to have private companies store metadata is 
  a non-starter because they are not interested in 
  maintaining such a database. (676) 
E. Proposals to the bulk collection of telephone metadata will 
 undermine the ability to prevent terrorist attacks. 
1. Limiting NSA bulk collection would assist terrorists. 
 (677-679) 
2. Section 215 may not be the most important anti-terror 
  tool, but it losing it will make it more difficult to 
  identify terrorist plots. (680) 
3. Abandoning bulk collection is like getting rid of airbags 
  on a car based on the theory that they haven't been 
  needed so far. (681) 
4. Reliance on private database storage represents a greater 
  threat to privacy than bulk government collection. (682- 
  686) 
5. Creating a private storage requirement would destroy the 
  ability to compete in the marketplace for U.S. 
  telecommunication companies. (687) 
6. The institution of a specific warrant requirement would 
 destroy the value of the Section 215 program. (688-690) 
7. Requiring opposing counsel to appear before the FISA 
Court is problematic. (691-695) 
III. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING GOVERNMENT 
 ACCESS TO --BIG DATA‖ 
A. The harm of government access to --big data‖ is 
 exaggerated. 
1. Internet users have demonstrated that privacy is not, for 
  them, a major concern as it relates to their online activities. 
a. Consumers are more than willing to give up their data. 
  (696-707) 
b. The advantages of data collection are real and the 
 harms are only speculative. (708) 
2. Our society properly evaluates security as more 
  important than privacy when the two are in conflict. 
  (709-710) 
3. Demands placed on Internet companies is an issue not 
  specific to the United States; European countries make 
  many demands on Internet companies. (711) 
4. Privacy in the home - the core of privacy - remains fully 
 protected. (712) 
 5. Anonymity is now a thing of the past. (713) 
 6. Private Internet companies are more responsible for the 
  loss of privacy on the Internet than is the government. 
a.Private Internet companies track extensively. (714-717) 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	21 
 N e g a ti v e I n d e x 
 
b. Private Internet companies are mostly to blame for the 
 loss of Internet neutrality. (718-719) 
7. U.S. policy should not be blamed for totalitarian 
 regimes' use of Internet censorship. 
a. If totalitarian regimes actually model U.S. Internet 
 policy, they would model U.S. checks. (720) 
b. Surveillance is now ubiquitous - whether public or 
  private - the only meaningful checks are those placed 
  on the consequences of disclosure. (721) 
c. The role of a free Internet in promoting democracy is 
 over-rated. (722) 
 8. Big data is generally good. (723) 
 9. Big data surveillance does not cause uniformity; 
 significant evidence exists to the contrary. (724-725) 
10. Consumers choose to share their data because of the 
benefits associated with such sharing. (726-728) 
B. Federal government access to --big data‖ is justified. 
 1. Terrorist activity involves the Internet. (729-733) 
 2. --Big data‖ is available to anyone interested in buying it; 
  government can buy data just like anyone else in the 
  marketplace. (734) 
3. Government monitoring of the Internet is justified for 
 enforcing laws against child pornography. 
 a. Child pornography is rampant on the Internet. (735) 
 b. Filters and other blocking schemes are insufficient to 
  deal with the problem of child pornography. (736- 
  737) 
C. The present system provides adequate controls on access 
 to --big data.‖ 
1. Following the Snowden disclosures, Internet companies 
  are no longer willing to share data in the absence of a 
  specific warrant. (738-744) 
2. Internet companies are working with civil rights groups 
 to maintain the freedom of the Internet. (745) 
3. The Global Network Initiative offers the superior 
 solution to the protection of --big data,‖ (746) 
4. Self-regulation provides the best means of securing --big 
 data.‖ (747-750) 
5. Existing regulation of --big data‖ access is sufficient. 
 (7 5 1 ) 
 6. The Privacy Act protects consumer privacy. (752-753) 
 7. The E-Government Act of 2002 protects consumer 
 privacy. (754) 
8. Encryption systems can adequate protect consumer 
 privacy. (755) 
 9. Cloud data is adequately protected at present. (756) 
 10. Recent disclosures have led to increased reliance on 
 encryption. (757) 
11. Consumers already have the option to opt out of 
 tracking. (758-761) 
12. Internet freedom is a pillar of U.S. foreign policy. (762- 
763) 
D. Proposed solutions for curtailing government access to big 
 data are problematic. 
1. Internet anonymity is not an option in the current 
environment with the threat of terrorism. (764-766) 
2. Free trade is threatened by an expansion of Internet 
 privacy rights. (767) 
3. The absence of monitoring on the Internet enables anti- 
  social behavior. 
  a. Anonymity on the Internet enables bullying. (768) 
  b. Anonymity on the Internet enables hate speech. (769) 
 4. Complete security of cloud data is impossible. (770) 
 5. Legal change can never keep up with the rapidity of 
 changes in technology. (771-775) 
6. The Big Data Initiative provides vital data to the Centers 
  for Disease Control for safeguarding the health of the American people from disease epidemics. (776-777) 
 7. Government action undermines self-regulation. (778) 
 8. The --right to be forgotten‖ is a poor solution to --big 
  data‖ problems. 
a. The European --right to be forgotten‖ does not translate 
  well to the U.S. legal system. (779-784) 
b. The --right to be forgotten‖ violates freedom of speech 
   by the restrictions it places on Internet companies. 
   (785-814) 
c. The --right to be forgotten‖ is technologically 
  i m p os s i b l e . ( 8 1 5 ) 
d. The --right to be forgotten‖ would allow people to 
  airbrush their reputations. (816) 
e. The --right to be forgotten‖ would force newspapers to 
  erase their archives. (817) 
f. The --right to be forgotten‖ is counterproductive; it 
  leads to the --Streisand effect.‖ (818-819) 
g. The --right to be forgotten‖ undermines the integrity of 
  public records. (820) 
h. The --right to be forgotten‖ would cause many lawsuits. 
  (8 2 1 ) 
i. The --right to be forgotten‖ is comparable to --book 
  burning.‖ (822-824) 
  j. The --right to be forgotten‖ is really censorship. (825) 
  k. The --right to be forgotten‖ would become a costly 
  government regulation. (826) 
l. The --right to be forgotten‖ is more appropriate to 
  repressive government systems. (827-828) 
  m. The --right to be forgotten‖ restricts journalists. (829) 
  n. The --right to be forgotten‖ benefits the rich and 
  powerful. (830) 
o. The --right to be forgotten‖ collides with other vital 
  civil rights. (831-835) 
p. The --right to be forgotten‖ would create bureaucratic 
  controls on the Internet. (836) 
q. The --right to be forgotten‖ would undermine net 
  freedom and neutrality. (837) 
r. The --right to be forgotten‖ actually increases state 
  power. (838) 
s. The --right to be forgotten‖ is unduly confusing. (839- 
840) 
IV. ANSWERS TO CYBER CRIME CASES: CURTAILING 
 NSA MONITORING OF THE INTERNET. 
 A. The risk of cyber attacks is a serious problem. 
 1. The extent of cyber attacks is significant. 
 
 
22 	THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 
N e g a ti v e I n d e x 

  a. Cyber attacks are already underway. (841) 
  b. The number of malware threats is increasing. (842) 
  c. Cyber attacks threaten the whole of the Internet. (843) d. Cyber attacks are disrupting use of the Internet. (844) 
  e. Target and other retailers have been dramatically 
  affected. (845) 
 f. Attacks will increase in the future unless the federal 
  government acts. (846-848) 
  g. The U.S. is on the verge of a cyber Pearl Harbor. (849) 
  h. Cyber attacks are easy and cheap for perpetrators; the 
  resources required are not large. (850-852) 
 i. Cyber crime is ubiquitous on the Internet. (853-856) 
 2. National governments sponsor cyber attacks. 
 a. China's preparation for cyber attacks is a significant 
  cyber threat. (857-869) 
  b. Iran is preparing for cyber attacks. (870-871) 
  c. North Korea is a cyber threat. (872) d. Russia is a cyber threat. (873-877) 
  e. Generally, countries positioning themselves as enemies 
   of the United States are preparing for cyber attacks. 
   (878-881) 
 3. The impact of cyber attacks is significant. 
 a. The U.S. military is threatened by cyber attacks. 
 (1). The U.S. military is continually under assault from 
   cyber attacks. (882-885) 
 (2). The U.S. military is heavily dependent on Internet- 
   based systems. (886-890) 
 (3). Vital military projects are now threatened by cyber 
   attacks. (891) 
 (4). Military networks cannot be fully separated from 
    civilian Internet systems; they are inter-dependent. 
    (892-896) 
 b. U.S. national security is threatened by cyber attacks. 
  (897-903) 
  c. Cyber attacks may escalate to physical warfare. (904) 
  d. The U.S. economy is threatened by cyber attacks. (905- 
  925) 
 e. Terrorists represent a cyber threat. 
 (1). Terrorists are funding their activities with cyber 
   attacks. (926) 
 (2). Terrorists are preparing for cyber attacks on the 
  U.S. (927-938) 
  f. Privacy is threatened by cyber attacks. (939) 
  g. Intellectual property is threatened by cyber attacks. 
  (940-942) 
  h. Vigilante groups represent a cyber threat. (943-944) 
  i. Major cyber attacks have already taken place. (945- 
 946) 
 B. Federal government monitoring of the Internet is justified 
 given the significance of the cyber threat. 
 1. Government agencies currently monitor the Internet. 
 (947-952) 
 2. The Einstein program monitors threat activity on the 
 Internet. (953-959) 
 3. The federal government's --Perfect Citizen‖ program 
 monitors threat activity on the Internet. (960) 
4. Private monitoring of the Internet is insufficient. (961- 
 965) 
5. The National Cyber Investigative Joint Task Force 
 monitors the Internet. (966-967) 
6. The FBI's --Operation Clean Slate‖ monitors the Internet. 
 (9 6 8 ) 
7. Monitoring must be complete in order to be effective. 
 (969-970) 
8. Deterrence cannot prevent cyber attacks; they must be 
 detected and disabled. (971) 
9. Monitoring is needed as a response to the terrorist threat. 
 (9 7 2 ) 
10. Generally, government monitoring of the Internet is 
 essential. (973-990) 
11. An over-reaction to the Snowden revelations would 
undermine cyber security. (991) 
C. The federal government's cyber activity preparations are 
 justified. 
1. The federal government's collection of --Zero Day‖ 
 capabilities is justified. (992-993) 
2. The federal government's efforts to break encryption 
 codes is justified. 
a. The breaking of encryption codes is not a new thing - it 
  has always been the task of intelligence services. 
  (9 9 4 ) 
b. The breaking of encryption codes is essential to fight 
 te r r o r is m . ( 9 9 5 ) 
c. The breaking of encryption codes is necessary in order 
 to enforce laws against pedophilia. (996) 
3. The president must retain the authority to address 
 Internet threats. (997) 
4. At present, offense is ahead of defense on the Internet. 
 (9 9 8 ) 
 5. Data in the cloud is currently unprotected. (999) 
 6. Offensive cyber tools are essential to deal with terrorists 
 on the Internet. (1000) 
7. Cyber crime on the Internet justifies a government 
 presence. (1001) 
8. Critical infrastructure must be protected from cyber 
 attack. (1002-1003) 
9. Nuclear weapons may even be subject to a cyber attack. 
 (1 0 0 4 ) 
10. The federal government should recognize that cyber 
  threats must be addressed to protect U.S. national 
  security - it is an existential threat. (1005-1007) 
11. Federal government cyber efforts have had success 
 against cyber threats. (1008-1014) 
12. Attacks must be recognized quickly in order for 
defensive steps to be taken in time. (1015-1016) 
D. The U.S. has already stopped insisting on the presence of 
back doors in computer software products. (1017) 
E. Proposals to curtail federal government surveillance of 
 activity on the Internet is problematic. 
1. Proposals to separate offensive from defensive cyber 
preparations will be disadvantageous. (1018-1019) 


  THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	23 
  N e g a ti v e I n d e x 
  
2. Proposals to stop the federal government from collecting 
--Zero Day‖ options will be disadvantageous. (1020) 
V. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING FEDERAL 
 GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE OF 
 GEOLOCATIONAL DATA 
A. Access to GPS data is essential to effective law 
 enforcement. (1021) 
B. The Supreme Court's Jones decision limits improper law 
  enforcement methods in collecting GPS data. (1022- 
  1024) 
C. Passage of the GPS Act would undermine the 
effectiveness of law enforcement. (1025) 
VI. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING THE FEDERAL 
 GOVERNMENT'S USE OF NATIONAL SECURITY 
 LETTERS 
A. National Security Letters (NSLs) aid terrorism 
 investigations. (1026-1027) 
B. The U.S. is only one of many nations using devices like 
 National Security Letters. (1028) 
C. Requiring a court-issued warrant for NSLs would 
  significantly impede terrorism investigations. (1029- 
  1030) 
VII. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING THE USE OF 
 DRONE SURVEILLANCE 
A. Drone surveillance is more likely to be beneficial than 
 harmful. 
1. Drone surveillance has many agricultural uses. (1031- 
 1033) 
2. Drone surveillance is useful in patrolling the border. 
 (1 0 3 4 ) 
3. Drone surveillance will assist in locating missing 
 pe r s o n s . ( 1 0 3 5 ) 
4. Drone surveillance assists in such environmental 
functions as mapping wildlife habitats. (1036) 
2. If government is prohibited from conducting its own 
  surveillance, it could simply purchase surveillance 
  services from private firms. (1050) 
VIII. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING THE 
 GOVERNMENT'S USE OF BIOMETRIC 
 IDENTIFICATION 
A. The increased use of biometric identification is justified. 
1. Secure identification is needed for law enforcement. 
 (1 0 5 1 ) 
2. Secure identification is necessary in combatting 
 terrorism. (1052-1053) 
3. The federal government's IDENT system is essential for 
 identifying terrorists. (1054) 
4. The FBI Next Generation identification system is 
 essential to law enforcement. (1055) 
5. The federal government's REAL ID system offers many 
 benefits. (1056-1057) 
B. DNA databases offer many more benefits than risks. 
1. DNA databases aid law enforcement investigations. 
 (1 0 5 8 ) 
2. The use familial DNA searching is essential to solving 
law enforcement's --cold cases.‖ (1059-1060) 
IX. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING SURVEILLANCE 
 FROM CAMERAS AND LICENSE PLATE READERS 
A. License plate readers aid in such crime fighting functions 
  as identifying stolen vehicles and identifying kidnappers 
  in --Amber Alert‖ situations. (1061) 
 B. Cameras promote compliance with the law. (1062) 
 C. Camera surveillance fights crime. (1063-1067) 
 D. Camera surveillance also checks government power. 
 (1 0 6 8 ) 
 E. Camera surveillance aids the military. (1069) 
 F. Camera surveillance reduces racial profiling. (1070) 
X. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING FOOD 

 5. Drone surveillance is essential to search and rescue 	AND 	DRUG 	ADMINISTRATION 
 
 operations. (1037) 
 6. Drone surveillance increases security from crime and 
 te r r o r is m . ( 1 0 3 8 ) 
 B. The threat to privacy from drone surveillance is 
 exaggerated. 
 1. Privacy is not an absolute right. (1039) 
 2. Privacy rights must be balanced against the obvious 
 a d v a n t a ge s o f d r o n e u s a ge . ( 1 0 4 0 ) 
 C. Existing regulation of drone activity is sufficient. 
 1. The FAA currently regulates drone usage. (1041) 
 2. State governments are regulating the use of drones. 
 (1042-1048) 
 D. Proposals for curtailing drone surveillance are 
 problematic. 
 1. Adoption of the Preserving Privacy Act of 2013 would 
 be problematic. (1049) 
SURVEILLANCE OF WHISTLEBLOWERS 
A. FDA employees were properly informed that they have no 
 --reasonable expectation of privacy‖ in the use of their 
 government-owned computers. (1071-1072) 
B. The FDA employees involved in the surveillance incident 
were using government computers. (1073-1074) 
C. The FDA had a legitimate purpose for monitoring 
employee computers. (1075-1076) 
D. The FDA has appropriate policies in place to protect 
privacy. (1077) 
E. The existing Whistleblower Protection Act provides 
 adequate protection for government whistleblowers. 
 (1 0 7 8 ) 
 
 
24 	THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 
N e g a ti v e I n d e x 

XI. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING THE 
 SURVEILLANCE OF MUSLIM CHARITIES 
A. Limiting the financial support of terrorism is the most 
 important front in the war on terrorism. (1078-1083) 
B. Federal indictments of Muslim charities have been limited 
  to only the worst cases of support for terrorism. (1083- 
  1084) 
C. Money is --fungible,‖ meaning that terrorist organizations 
  can devote their own funds to weapons and attacks when 
  supporters provide food and clothing under the guise of 
  --charitable‖ support. (1085-1088) 
D. Imposing a warrant requirement for financial searches 
 would be impractical. (1089) 
E. The Obama administration has relaxed its enforcement of 
the material support statutes. (1090) 
ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING THE 
  FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S PHYSICAL 
  SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS 
I. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING SURVEILLANCE 
 IN MUSLIM COMMUNITIES 
A. Federal government surveillance in Muslim communities 
 is justified. 
1. Many foreign fighters are returning home from fighting 
 with terrorist groups in Syria and Somalia. (1091-1093) 
2. Homegrown terrorist plots represent a significant threat. 
 (1094-1108) 
3. Human intelligence is needed in order to identify 
 t e r r o r i s t pl ot s . ( 1 1 0 9 ) 
 4. Community involvement is a useful strategy. (1110) 
 5. Sleeper cells exist in the U.S. (1111) 
 6. Some members of Muslim communities are being 
 radicalized. (1112) 
7. Terrorist recruitment is a threat that must be taken 
 seriously. (1113-1114) 
B. The methods used by the federal government in Muslim 
 communities are appropriate. 
 1. Sting operations deter terrorists. (1115-1117) 
 2. The use of informants is a useful tool against terrorism. 
 (1118-1119) 
3. The federal government actually needs more informants 
than it now has available. (1120) 
II. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING SURVEILLANCE 
 BY THE TRANSPORTATION SECURITY 
 ADMINISTRATION (TSA) 
A. TSA programs and methods are appropriate in to stop 
 te r r o r is ts. 
1. The TSA's SPOT program is a good program. (1121- 
 1122) 
2. TSA practices in searching laptops is appropriately 
  m a na ge d . 
a. Laptop searches are vital in stopping terrorists. (1123- 
1126) 
b. Laptops should not be compared to a home as it relates 
  to privacy standards. (1127) 
c. The TSA has a justifiable rationale for searching 
  laptops. (1128-1129) 
d. Spelling out the criteria for laptop searches would tip 
  off the terrorists. (1130-1131) 
 e. Laptop searches are not done frivolously. (1132-1133) 
3. TSA scanners provide security without unduly impacting 
  personal privacy. 
  a. TSA scanners are effective. (1134-1136) 
  b. TSA scanners blur body images so as to protect 
 privacy. (1137) 
4. Maintenance of the TSA terror watch list is essential. 
 (1 1 3 8 ) 
B. TSA operation of passenger screening is superior to 
 privatization. 
1. The TSA does a good job of passenger screening. 
  a. The TSA provides effective training. (1139) 
  b. The TSA has a new focus on treating passengers with 
  respect. (1140) 
c. A federalized workforce best provides for uniformity 
 throughout the nation's airports. (1141) 
2. Privatizing passenger screening is a suboptimal solution. 
a. The profit motive will distract security companies from 
  the core mission of providing security. (1142) 
b. Privatization of passenger screening is already an 
   option for airports; the fact that so few airports have 
   opted for privatization is telling. (1143) 
c. Airport security is an inherently government function. 
  (1 1 4 4 ) 
d. Private airport security screening would be more 
 expensive. (1145-1146) 
C. The TSA Automatic Targeting System is an example of 
 the importance of data surveillance. (1147) 
D. TSA PreCheck is solving many of the delay problems. 
 (1 1 4 8 ) 
E. The TSA --Secure Flight‖ system properly identifies 
 persons who represent a threat. (1149) 
F. The TSA operates a redress system to address the needs of 
  persons who have been improperly placed on --no fly‖ 
  lists. (1150) 
III. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING SURVEILLANCE 
 OF IMMIGRANTS 
A. The federal government's emphasis on the enforcement of 
 immigration laws is justified. 
1. Monitoring of terrorist entry across our borders should 
 obviously be a priority. (1151) 
 2. Surveillance of maritime borders is essential. (1152) 
 3. The use of UAVs (drones) on the border is essential. 
 (1 1 5 3 ) 
4. Workplace enforcement is essential to protect U.S. 
 w o r ke r s . ( 1 1 5 4 ) 
5. Border enforcement is essential for the apprehension of 
criminals. (1155) 


  THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	25 
  N e g a ti v e I n d e x 
  
6. Border enforcement is essential to limit the activity of 
 drug cartels. (1156-1157) 
7. Drivers license enforcement and standardization is an 
 appropriate means of immigration enforcement. (1158) 
8. Failure to secure the border region will allow a host of 
 illegal activities. (1159-1160) 
B. Immigration enforcement is currently working well. 
1. The number of persons crossing the border illegally has 
 declined. (1161) 
2. E-Verify is working well as a means of checking 
 eligibility to work. (1162) 
 3. Violence along the border has been kept in check. (1163) 
 4. Radio Frequency Identification systems are streamlining 
 t h e b o r de r c he c k p r o c e s s . ( 1 1 6 4 ) 
5. Using high tech screening methods at the border saves 
 t a x p a ye r s m o ne y . ( 1 1 6 5 ) 
6. The system for screening visa applicants is working well. 
 (1 1 6 6 ) 
C. The existence of immigration enforcement systems should 
 not be characterized as anti-immigrant in nature. 
1. The U.S. admits higher numbers of immigrants than any 
 other nation on earth. (1167) 
2. The present system provides a meaningful path to 
 citizenship for immigrants. (1168) 
D. Failure to enforce immigration laws is an unacceptable 
 solution. 
1. Failure to enforce immigration laws will result in large 
  waves of undocumented immigrants entering the 
  country. (1169-1171) 
2. Large numbers of undocumented immigrants cause 
 unemployment for needy U.S. citizens. (1172) 
3. Large numbers of undocumented immigrants depress 
 wages for needy U.S. citizens. (1173) 
4. Large numbers of undocumented immigrants increase 
 the cost of education for states and localities. (1174) 
5. Large numbers of undocumented immigrants increase 
 health care costs. (1175) 
6. Large numbers of undocumented immigrants harms the 
environment. (1176) 
IV. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING THE 
 SURVEILLANCE POWERS OF THE U.S. CENSUS 
 B UR EA U 
A. The American Community Survey is an important 
 program of the U.S. Census Bureau. 
1. There is no question as to the Constitutionality of the 
 ACS. (1177) 
 2. The ACS provides vital information. (1178) 
 3. Accurate information is essential to good governance. 
 (1179-1182) 
4. The ACS is vital to determine proper allocation of 
 federal funding. (1183-1184) 
5. The racial questions on the ACS provide essential 
  information to determine whether voting rights laws are 
  being properly enforced. (1185) 
  
B. Making the ACS voluntary would destroy its utility. 
1. Making the ACS voluntary introduces --response bias‖ 
 into the survey. (1186) 
2. Making the ACS voluntary would increase the cost of the 
survey. (1187-1188) 
V. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING THE 
 SURVEILLANCE OF ATTORNEY-CLIENT 
 COMMUNICATION 
A. Attorney-client monitoring is used only for terrorism 
  suspects receiving a special designation from the 
  Attorney General. (1189) 
B. Minimization procedures are in place whenever 
 monitoring takes place. (1190) 
C. The NSA has a special procedure in place for segregating 
  conversations involving attorney-client communication. 
  (1 1 9 1 ) 
D. The Lynne Stewart conviction was justified by the 
  circumstances surrounding her assistance given to a 
  dangerous terrorism suspect. (1192-1193) 
VI. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING DRUG 
 S UR VE IL L A N C E 
A. The claim that marijuana enforcement is filling up prisons 
 and jails is false. 
1. Users are almost never incarcerated and the number of 
 marijuana dealers incarcerated is small. (1194) 
2. Marijuana-only legalization would have limited impact 
 on prison use. (1195-1196) 
B. The drug war is not hopeless; many effective means are 
 now in use. 
 1. Gamma Ray detections are now in use. (1197) 
 2. X-ray scanners are in use. (1198) 
 3. A variety of scanning devices are in use. (1199) 
C. Failure to enforce drug laws would introduce a variety of 
 harmful impacts. 
1. Terrorists are increasingly involved with drug 
 smuggling. (1200-1216) 
2. Hard drug legalization would lead to a public health 
 disaster. (1217) 
3. Marijuana legalization would lead to harmful impacts. 
a. Marijuana legalization would increase use. (1218- 
  1220) 
  b. Marijuana is a gateway drug. (1221) 
  c. Marijuana imposes significant physical harms. (1222- 
 1225) 
D. Curtailing drug enforcement would not solve the problems 
 as claimed in the affirmative case. 
1. Drug legalization would not significantly limit drug 
 cartel violence. (1226-1235) 
2. In the event of marijuana legalization, federal 
  surveillance would not be curtailed because it would 
  still be pervasive for other drug issues. (1236) 
  
  
26 	THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 
N e g a ti v e I n d e x 

VII. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING 
 SURVEILLANCE THROUGH NATIONAL 
 STANDARDIZED TESTING 
A. Standardized testing offers many educational benefits. 
1. Standardized tests are a dependable predictor of college 
 success. (1237-1238) 
 2. Standardized tests aid student achievement. (1239-1240) 3. Standardized tests are generally beneficial. (1241-1242) 
 4. Standardized tests assist parents in recognizing when 
 students need help. (1243) 
5. Standardized testing aids in the development of proper 
 curriculum. (1244-1245) 
 6. Standardized testing promotes creativity. (1246-1247) 
 7. Standardized testing promotes collaboration among 
 t e a c he r s . ( 1 2 4 8 ) 
8. Standardized testing helps teachers and students adjust 
 when students move to a new location. (1249) 
9. Standardized testing best prepares students for real life. 
 (1 2 5 0 ) 
10. Standardized tests are more fair than non-standardized 
 tests. (1251-1252) 
 11. Standardized tests have a proven success record. (1253) 12. The validity of standardized testing has been proven. 
 (1 2 5 4 ) 
13. Standardized tests aid educational accountability. 
 (1 2 5 5 ) 
14. Standardized testing aids in the making of education 
 decisions. (1256) 
15. Standardized testing aid inner city schools by focusing 
  funding in ways that had not been possible before. 
  (1 2 5 7 ) 
B. The harms of standardized testing are exaggerated. 
1. Standardized testing does not harm minority students. 
 (1258-1260) 
2. Standardized testing does not harm students with 
 disabilities. (1261-1262) 
3. Test preparation courses do not advantage wealthier 
  students; free preparation courses are now available. 
  (1 2 6 3 ) 
4. Test questions on standardized tests are not culturally 
 biased as is commonly claimed. (1264-1265) 
5. Teaching to the test is not a significant problem. (1266- 
 1268) 
6. It is not true that colleges are abandoning the SAT in 
 college entry processes. (1269) 
7. Standardized testing should not be considered the darling 
  of the political right; support for standardized testing 
  exists all along the political spectrum. (1270) 
VIII. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING 
 SURVEILLANCE POWERS OF THE INTERNAL 
 REVENUE SERVICE 
A. The Treasury Department's --FinCen‖ system is working 
 well. (1271) 
B. The IRS political targeting scandal did not implicate the 
White House. (1272) 
C. While mistakes were made by the IRS, the targeting of 
 groups was not caused by political influence. (1273-1274) 
D. The --Right to Financial Privacy Act‖ properly addressed 
 financial privacy rights. (1275) 
E. The Obama administration has corrected the mistakes that 
 led to the IRS targeting scandal. (1276) 
F. The IRS is committed to the elimination of any political 
targeting. (1277-1278) 
IX. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING MEDICAL 
 S UR VE IL L A N C E 
A. Medical surveillance is vitally important. 
 1. The risk of the Ebola virus spread is significant. (1279) 
 2. Microbes can be used as weapons of war. (1280) 
 3. Health surveillance now looks for evidence of the Ebola 
 vi r u s . ( 1 2 8 1 ) 
 4. Disease surveillance saves lives. (1282-1285) 
B. The problems with the HealthCare.gov Website are 
 exaggerated. 
1. Healthcare.gov does not collect sensitive data. (1286- 
 1289) 
2. Government agencies properly protect medical data 
 collected at HealthCare.gov. (1290-1291) 
C. Digital medical records offer many more advantages than 
 d i s a d va n t a ge s . 
 1. Health data sharing saves lives. (1292-1293) 
 2. Digital data record sharing improves the quality of care. 
 (1294-1295) 
 3. Digital records reduce medical errors. (1296) 
D. The privacy of medical records is adequately protected at 
present. (1297) 
X. ANSWERS TO CASES CURTAILING WELFARE 
 S UR VE IL L A N C E 
A. Welfare surveillance has devolved to state governments; 
  federal agencies are not conducting the surveillance. 
  (1 2 9 8 ) 
B. Welfare fraud is a major problem. (1299-1300) 


GENERIC AND SPECIFIC DISADVANTAGES 
I. GROWTH BAD DISADVANTAGE 
A. Uniqueness 
1. Current trajectories of growth are environmentally and 
 physically unsustainable. (1301-1308) 
2. The global economy is at a high risk of collapse now. 
 (1309-1313) 
3. Technology will not make economic growth sustainable. 
 (1314-1318) 
 4. The economy is not resilient to further shocks. (1319) 
B. Link 
1. Curtailing domestic surveillance would greatly increase 
the growth of the technological sector. (1320-1327) 


  THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	27 
  N e g a ti v e I n d e x 
  
C. Internal Link 
1. The high tech sector is a substantial contributor to 
 economic growth. (1328-1332 
2. The U.S. economy is key to the global economy. (1333- 
 1338) 
3. An economic crisis would trigger a paradigm shift in the 
  global economy to degrowthed local economies. (1339- 
  1341) 
4. Economic systems focused on degrowth are the only way 
 to resolve climate change. (1342-1346) 
 5. Economic degrowth conserves biodiversity. (1347) 
 6. More localized economies would better protect public 
 health. (1348-1349) 
7. Localized economies generate more food security. 
 (1350-1354) 
D. Impact 
1. High rates of economic growth increase the likelihood of 
 war. (1355-1356) 
 2. Economic decline does not cause war. (1357) 
 3. Food insecurity causes war. (1358-1361) 
 4. Transitioning the economy now would be less turbulent 
 than a crisis later. (1362-1364) 
 5. Climate change risks human extinction. (1365) 
 6. Climate change would destroy global agriculture. (1366- 
 1369) 
 7. Climate change is real and human caused. (1370-1372) 
 8. New strands of disease could cause mass death if the 
 world remains interconnected. (1373-1377) 
9. Biodiversity loss imperils the planet. (1378-1379) 
II. COURT CAPITAL DISADVANTAGE 
A. Uniqueness 
1. The Supreme Court will rule against President Obama in 
 the Zivitosky v. Kerry now. (1380-1390) 
2. The Court will have to make a broad ruling in Zivitosky 
 v. Kerry. (1391-1393) 
B. Link 
 1. Court ruling limiting war powers cause backlash. (1394). 
 2. Court rulings in national security areas cause backlash. 
 (1 3 9 5 ) 
3. Ruling for executive accountability costs the Court 
 strategic capital. (1396-1397) 
C. Internal Link 
1. Rulings concerning the Middle East like Zivitosky 
 require court capital. (1398-1399). 
2. Ruling against the president on foreign affairs requires 
 court capital. (1400-1401) 
3. The Court does not make multiple controversial rulings 
  consecutively so the plan trades off with ruling for 
  Congress in Zivitosky. (1402-1404) 
4. Ruling for Congress in Zivitosky is necessary to check 
 unrestrained executive power. (1405-1413) 
5. Ruling for Congress is key to the recognition power 
  necessary to facilitate free trade agreements. (1414- 
  1416) 
D. Impact 
1. Unrestrained executive causes multiple hotspots to 
 escalate. (1417-1420) 
2. Free trade reduces the risk of war. (1421-1424) 
III. COURT LEGITIMACY DISADVANTAGE 
A. Uniqueness 
1. The Roberts Court is one of the most minimalist in 
 history. (1425-1428) 
 2. Hobby Lobby did not impact court legitimacy. (1429) 
B. Link 
1. The plan creates a large amount of national security 
 cases that clog the court. (1430-1432) 
2. Lower courts overruling the Supreme Court hurts 
 legitimacy. (1433) 
3. Controversial national security decisions will be ignored 
 which wrecks court legitimacy. (1434-1437) 
C. Internal Link 
1. Controversial court decisions lead to judiciary budget 
 cuts. (1438-1440) 
 2. Judiciary budget cuts hurt economic growth. (1441). 
 3. Clogged ineffective court systems prevent oil spill 
 prevention litigation. (1442-1443) 
4. Unrestrained oil drilling destroys ocean environments. 
 (1444-1452) 
 5. Court legitimacy is not resilient. (1453) 
D. Impacts 
1. Healthy ocean ecosystems help prevent planetary 
 extinction. (1454-1458) 
2. Lack of court legitimacy damages separation of powers. 
(1 4 5 9 ) 
IV. HUMAN RIGHTS CREDIBILITY DISADVANTAGE 
A. Uniqueness 
 1. Chinese soft power is high now. (1460-1464) 
B. Link 
1. U.S. surveillance activities violate human rights. (1465- 
 1472) 
C. Internal Link 
1. Increasing human rights credibility increases soft power. 
 (1473-1474) 
2. Increasing U.S. human rights credibility allows effective 
 limiting of Chinese soft power. (1475-1478) 
 3. U.S. soft power is recoverable. (1479) 
 4. U.S. and Chinese soft power is zero sum. (1480-1483) 
 5. Chinese soft power contains regional conflict. (1484- 
 1487) 
 6. Chinese soft power prevents war with the U.S. (1488) 
 7. Chinese soft power maintains internal Communist 
 Central Party (CCP) stability. (1489-1490) 
 8. Chinese soft power prevents failed states. (1491) 
D. Impact 
1. Regional Asian conflicts escalate to nuclear war. (1492) 


28 	THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 
N e g a ti v e I n d e x 

2. Failed states risk entanglement and nuclear conflict. 
 (1 4 9 3 ) 
3. U.S.-China war would escalate t nuclear use. (1494- 
 1495) 
 4. CCP instability triggers war in Asia. (1496-1497) 
 5. War in East Asia goes nuclear. (1498-1501) 
V. INTERNET REGULATION DISADVANTAGE 
A. Uniqueness 
 1. U.S. Internet innovation is high now. (1502-1507) 
 2. Private entities lead Internet governance now. (1508- 
 1511) 
 3. No UN regulation of the Internet now. (1512) 4. Internet competition is high now. (1513-1515) 
B. Link 
1. International governance of the Internet hinders 
 innovation. (1516) 
2. Government led management of the Internet in the 
 interest of privacy hinders innovation. (1517-1523) 
3. Private companies self-regulating privacy best maintains 
 innovation. (1524-1527) 
4. Legislative rules on Internet companies hinder 
 innovation. (1528-1530) 
C. Internal Link 
 1. U.S. Internet policies are modeled globally. (1531) 
 2. Internet innovation solves climate change. (1532-1534) 
 3. Internet innovation is key to sustain economic growth. 
 (1535-1543) 
 4. Decentralized Internet is key to free speech. (1544) 
 5. Internet innovation is key to reduce health care costs. 
 (1545-1546) 
6. Decreasing health care costs is key to reduce income 
 inequality. (1547-1551) 
7. Private companies better facilitate Internet liberalization. 
 (1552-1555) 
8. Foreign censorship policies undermine cyber security 
 cooperation. (1556-1557) 
9. Internet liberalization improves the global economy. 
 (1558-1560) 
10. Internet liberalization improves U.S.-China relations. 
 (1 5 6 1 ) 
11. Internet liberalization is key to prevent politicized 
 policy making. (1562-1563) 
12. Internet innovation sustains bandwidth increases key to 
 military operation. (1564) 
 13. Bandwidth shortages undermine UAV missions. (1565) 
 14. UAV's are key to overall military readiness. (1566- 
 1569) 
D. Impact 
 1. Internet fracturing cause nationalism and war. (1570) 
 2. Internet innovation solves existential threats. (1571- 
 1577) 
3. Ineffective cyber security risks nuclear conflict. (1578- 
1579) 
4. Military readiness helps avert multiple scenarios for 
 conflict. (1580-1581) 
5. Economic decline creates multiple scenarios for conflicts 
 that can escalate. (1582-1590) 
6. Climate change is real, anthropogenic and risks 
 extinction. (1591-1593) 
7. Increasing C02 emissions won't effect the onset of the 
 next Ice Age. (1594-1596) 
8. Limiting C02 emissions is key to sustainable agriculture. 
 (1597-1601) 
9. U.S. public health systems are uniquely key to prevent 
the onset of infectious disease. (1602-1605) 
VI. U.S. LEADERSHIP DISADVANTAGE 
A. Uniqueness 
1. Obama is pursuing shifts in grand strategy now. (1606- 
 1609) 
2. Declines in relative power are causing changes in grand 
 strategy now. (1610-1614) 
B. Link 
1. Technological and scientific leadership sustains 
 hegemony. (1615-1617) 
2. Reforming domestic surveillance restores soft power 
  necessary to sustain current grand strategies. (1618- 
  1629) 
3. Restoring economic power sustains current U.S. grand 
 strategy. (1630-1633) 
C. Internal Link 
1. Current U.S. grand strategy encourages nuclear 
 proliferation. (1634-1640) 
D. Impact 
 1. Nuclear proliferation causes nuclear war. (1641-1644) 
 2. More restrained grand strategies stabilize the Middle 
 East. (1645-1648) 
3. A system of multipolarity better averts great power 
 nuclear war. (1649-1652) 
4. A system of multipolarity would be stable and not 
 antagonize Russia and China. (1653-1658) 
5. Current grand strategy encourages counterbalancing 
 which decreases international stability. (1659-1664) 
6. Current grand strategy causes military overstretch. 
 (1665-1666) 
7. A decline in U.S. power would not increase instability. 
 (1667-1674) 
8. A decline in credibility has no material impact. (1675- 
1677) 
VII. POLITICS DISADVANTAGE 
A. Uniqueness 
 1. Trade Promotion Authority will pass now. (1678-1688) 
 2. The GOP has strong unity now. (1689-1690) 
 3. President Obama has political capital now. (1691-1693) 
B. Link 
1. Reforming domestic surveillance requires political 
capital. (1694-1696) 


  THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	29 
  N e g a ti v e I n d e x 
  
2. Reforms are perceived as half measures that anger the 
 left and the right. (1697-1699) 
3. Past efforts demonstrate domestic surveillance reform is 
 politically contentious. (1700-1703) 
4. Key senators oppose domestic surveillance curtailment. 
 (1704-1706) 
5. Reforming domestic surveillance would fracture GOP 
unity. (1707-1715) 
C. Internal Link 
1. GOP unity is necessary to pass trade promotion 
 authority. (1716-1719) 
2. Political capital is necessary to ensure trade promotion 
 authority. (1720-1726) 
3. Trade promotion authority is necessary and sufficient to 
  ensure the passage of the Trans Pacific Partnership 
  (TPP). (1727-1732) 
4. Trade promotion authority is a necessary tool for a 
 successful Asia Pivot. (1733-1741) 
5. Trade promotion authority is key to the U.S. agricultural 
 sector. (1742-1743) 
6. Trade promotion authority helps sustain U.S. hegemony. 
 (1744-1746) 
7. Trade promotion authority is key to economic growth. 
 (1747-1749) 
8. Trade promotion authority helps expand the global 
 trading system. (1750-1751) 
 9. TPP is key to the U.S. medical industry. (1752-1753) 
 10. TPP is key to a healthy global Internet. (1754) 
 11. TPP is key to economic leadership in Asia. (1755-1758) 
 12. TPP is key to Japanese economic growth. (1759-1760) 
 13. TPP helps defuse Asian maritime conflicts. (1761- 
1762) 
D. Impact 
1. A successful Asia Pivot is necessary to avert war in Asia. 
 (1763-1765) 
2. War in Asia is likely without a strong U.S. presence. 
 (1766-1767) 
3. Japanese economic growth is key to prevent war with 
 China. (1768) 
4. U.S. agriculture is key to prevent food price spikes that 
 imperil billions. (1769-1770) 
5. Expanding global trade helps reduce interstate conflict. 
 (1771-1772) 
6. Strong economic growth is key to generate international 
 stability. (1773-1775) 
7. U.S. leadership and hegemony is key to sustain 
international stability. (1776-1780) 
VIII. INTERNET LIBERALIZATION DA 
A. Uniqueness 
 1. Russia is increasing censorship now. (1781-1786) 
 2. Iran is increasing censorship now. (1787-1792) 
 3. China is increasing censorship now. (1793-1794) 
 4. Iran censorship is effective now. (1795-1796) 
 5. Russian censorship is effective now. (1797-1803) 
 6. Chinese censorship works. (1804) 
 
B. Link 
1. Curtailing domestic surveillance restores the U.S. 
  Freedom Agenda and causes Internet liberalization 
  aboard. (1805-1815) 
C. Internal Link 
1. Russian censorship is key to maintain regime stability. 
 (1816-1819) 
2. Uncensored Chinese internet collapses the Chinese 
 Communist Party (CCP). (1820-1826) 
3. Iranian censorship is key to secure a successful U.S.-Iran 
 nuclear deal. (1827-1838) 
D. Impact 
1. Iranian nuclear deal key to prevent nuclear proliferation 
 and Middle East war. (1839-1846) 
 2. Russia regime instability risks nuclear war. (1847-1851) 
 3. CCP collapse triggers war on the Korean peninsula. 
 (1 8 5 2 ) 
 4. CCP collapse causes war over Taiwan. (1853-1854) 
 5. CCP collapse causes war over the Senkaku islands. 
 (1 8 5 5 ) 
 6. CCP collapse causes Indo-Sino border wars. (1856-1857) 
 7. CCP collapse hinders the Indian economy. (1858) 
 8. CCP collapse harms the global economy. (1859) 
IX . T E R R O R IS M D A 
A. Uniqueness 
 1. The Al Qaeda threat is formidable now. (1860-1866) 
 2. Courts are showing deference on national security now. 
 (1867-1870) 
B. Link 
1. Requiring certification undermines the FISA Court. 
 (1 8 7 1 ) 
2. Overly stringent Congressional oversight hurts 
 counterterrorism. (1872-1873) 
3. Extending due process rights hurts counter terrorism. 
 (1874-1876) 
 4. Disclosing FISA decisions hurts counterterrorism. (1877) 
 5. The Freedom Act would undermine counter terrorism. 
 (1 8 7 8 ) 
6. Reforming metadata would hurt counter terrorism. 
 (1 8 7 9 ) 
7. Reforming National Security Letters hurts the FISA 
 Court. (1880-1881) 
8. Requiring a special advocate hurts the FISA Court. 
 (1882-1887) 
9. Relying more on the private sector hinders counter 
 te r r o r is m . ( 1 8 8 8 ) 
10. Court rulings against surveillance would break the state 
 secrets privilege. (1889-1890) 
11. Court ruling to curtail surveillance would break national 
 security deference. (1891-1893) 
 12. Disclosing court decisions helps terrorists. (1894-1895) 
 13. Incorporating international law into domestic law hurts 
counter terrorism. (1896-1897) 


30 	THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 
 N e g a ti v e I n d e x 
14. Court decisions curtailing surveillance would break the 
political question doctrine. (1898-1899) 
 C. Internal Link 
 1. Broad NSA surveillance powers are key to effective 
 cyber security. (1900-1905) 
 2. PRISM program effectively contains terrorist threats. 
 (1906-1908) 
 3. Speed of response is key to combat terrorism. (1909) 
 4. State secrets privilege is key to combat terrorism. (1910- 
 1912). 
 5. Broad NSA surveillance powers are key to prevent 
 terrorist attacks. (1913-1920) 
 6. Metadata is an effective tool to fight terrorists. (1921- 
 1929) 
 7. Program 702 is an effective tool against terrorism. (1930) 
 8. The New America report against NSA surveillance is 
 deeply flawed. (1931-1936) 
 9. The Presidential Review Group study is flawed. (1937- 
 1938) 
 10. National security deference is key to maintain foreign 
 affairs coherence. (1939-1941) 
 11. The political question doctrine is key to interbranch 
  cooperation necessary for national security. (1942- 
  1943) 
 12. Significant court involvement in national security 
 hinders it. (1944-1946) 
 13. Surveillance powers are key to U.S. hegemony. (1947) 
 D. Impact 
 1. Terrorists will target energy infrastructure hurting the 
 economy. (1948-1954) 
 2. Bioterrorism is an increasing risk and is worse than 
 nuclear war. (1955-1968) 
 3. Cyber terrorism is a high threat and risks nuclear 
  miscalculation and the security of critical infrastructure. 
  (1969-1973) 
 4. Cyber espionage hurts global trade. (1974-1975) 
 5. Cyber espionage imperils the entire U.S.-China 
 relationship. (1976-1979) 
 6. Cyber espionage harms multiple elements of the U.S. 
 economy. (1980-1984) 
 7. Nuclear terrorism is a probable threat. (1985-1990) 
 8. A significant terrorist attack will cause nuclear 
 retaliation. (1991-1993) 
 9. The U.S. electric grid is highly vulnerable to cyber 
 attacks. (1994-1995) 
 10. A slowing of U.S. economic growth triggers multiple 
 scenarios for conflict. (1996-2000) 
 
 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	31 
 
 
 
1. James Clapp, (Member of the New York Bar, Editor), RANDOM HOUSE WEBSTER'S POCKET LEGAL DICTIONARY, 3rd Ed., 2007, 103. Federal 
government: Relating to the government and law of the United States, as 
distinguished from a state. 
2. Maurice Waite, (Editor), OXFORD DICTIONARY & THESAURUS, 2007, 377. 
Federal government: relating to the central government of a federation. 
3. Michael Agnes, (Editor), WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY, 4th 
College Edition, 2007, 290. Federal government: Of a union of states under a central 
government. 
4. Maurice Waite, (Editor), OXFORD DICTIONARY & THESAURUS, 2007, 1032. 
Substantially: in essence, basically, fundamentally. 
5. Christine Lindberg, (Editor), OXFORD COLLEGE DICTIONARY, 2nd Ed., 2007, 
1369. Substantially: Concerning the essentials of something. 
6. Maurice Waite, (Editor), OXFORD DICTIONARY & THESAURUS, 2007, 1032. 
Substantially: to a great extent. 
7. Carol-June Cassidy, (Editor), CAMBRIDGE DICTIONARY OF AMERICAN 
ENGLISH, 2nd Ed., 2008, 873. Substantially: to a large degree. 


22. Joseph Pickett, (Editor)H, AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE 
ENGLISH LANGUAGE, 4T ED., 2006, 446. Curtail: To cut short or reduce. 
23. MERRIAM WEBSTER'S SCHOOL DICTIONARY, 2015, 234. Curtail: To 
shorten or reduce by cutting away the end or another part of. 
24. Steven Kleinedler, (Editor), THE AMERICAN HERITAGE COLLEGE 
WRITER'S DICTIONARY, 2013, 247. Curtail: To cut short; reduce. 

25. Benjamin ZNimmer, (Editor), OXFORD AMERICAN DICTIONARY AND 
THESAURUS, 2 D Ed., 2009, 306. Curtail: Limit or cut short. 
26. Andrew Sparks, (Editor), WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD COLLEGE 
DICTIONARY, 5TH Ed., 2014, 364. Curtail: To cut short; reduce; abridge. 
27. Angus Stevenson, (Editor), NEW OXFORD AMERICAN DICTIONARY, 3rd 
Ed., 2010, 425. Curtail: Reduce in extent or quantity. 
28. WORDS & PHRASES, Vol. 10B, 2008, 144. --Curtail‖ means to cut off the end 
or any part of; hence to shorten, abridge; diminish, lessen, reduce, and has no such meaning as abolish. 
29. Augustus Stevenson, (Editor), NEW OXFORD AMERICAN DICTIONARY, 3rd 
Ed., 2010, 924. Its: Belonging to or associated with a thing previously mentioned or 

8. Michael Agnes, (Editor), WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY, 4 th 
College Edition, 2007, 780. Substantial: Material, strong, large. 
9. Maurice Waite, (Editor), OXFORD DICTIONARY & THESAURUS, 2007, 1032. 
Substantially: of great importance, size, or value. 
10. Christopher Leonesio, (Managing Editor), AMERICAN HERITAGE HIGH 
SCHOOL DICTIONARY, 4th Ed., 2007, 1376. Substantial: Considerable in 
easily identified. 
30. Frederick Mish, (Editor-in-chief), WEBSTER'S COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY, 
10th ed., 1993, 623. Its: Of or relating to it or itself, esp. as possessor. 
31. Justin Crozier, (Editor), COLLINS DICTIONARY AND THESAURUS, 2005, 
448. Its: Of or belonging to it. 

importance, value, degree, amount, or extent. 
32. Jean McKechnie, (Sr. Editor), nWEBSTER'S NEW TWENTIETH CENTURY 
DICTIONARY, UNABRIDGED, 2 d Ed., 1979, 977. Its: Of, or belonging to, or done 

11. Daniel Oran, (Assitant Dir., National Paralegalth Institute & J.D., Yale Law 
School), ORAN'S DICTIONARY OF THE LAW, 4 Ed., 2008, 510. Substantial: 
Valuable, real, worthwhile. 
12. Richard Bowyer, (Editor), DICTIONARY OF MILITARY TERMS, 3rd Ed. 
2004, 235. Substantive: Permanent (as opposed to acting or temporary). 
13. Sandra Anderson, (Editor), COLLINS ENGLISH DICTIONARY, 8th Ed., 2006, 
1606. Substantial: Of or relating to the basic or fundamental substance or aspects of a 
thing. 
14. Stuart Flexner, (Editor-in-chief), RANDOM HOUSE DICTIONARY OF THE 
ENGLISH LANGUAGE, UNABRIDGED, 2nd Ed., 1987, 1897. Substantial: Of a 
corporeal or material nature; tangible; real. 
15. Federal Tax Regulation, Section 1.409A-3(j)6, INCOME TAX REGULATIONS 
(Wolters Kluwer Business Publication), 2008, 723. For this purpose, a reduction that 
is less than 25% of the deferred amount in dispute is not a substantial reduction. 
16. WORDS AND PHRASES, Vol. 40B, 2002, 326. Where debtor-jewelry retailers 
by it. 
33. Andrew Sparks, (Editor), WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD COLLEGE 
DICTIONARY, 5TH Ed., 2014, 433. Domestic: Of one's own country or the country 
referred to. 
34. MERRIAM WEBSTER DESK DICTIONARY, 1995, 164. Domestic: Relating or 
limited to one's own country or the country under consideration. 
35. Stuart Flexner, (Editor), RANDOM HOUSE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH 
LANGUAGE, 2ND ED., UNABRIDGED, 1987, 581. Domestic: Of or pertaining to 
one's own or a particular country. 
36. WORDS & PHRASES, Vol. 13, 2007, 460. --Domestic‖ is defined as belonging 
to the home or household concerning or related to the home or family, or as pertaining to one's house or home or one's household or family. 
37. MERRIAM WEBSTER'S SCHOOL DICTIONARY, 2015, 283. Domestic: From 
Latin domus: --the house.‖ 

historically obtained 15-25% of the inventory of their two divisions through consignments, they were not, as a matter of law, substantially engaged in selling the 
goods of others. In re Wedlo Holdings, Inc. (North Dakota case) 
17. WORDS & PHRASES, Vol. 40B, 2002, 329. Substantially: The major portion or 
more than one-half of a "phalange" of a finger, which means a finger bone, as 
distinguished from the flesh, must be removed before the same is "substantially" lost, 
so as to constitute a "loss of the first phalange," within Workmen's Compensation Law, § 15, subd. 3, and such loss is not made out where there is no showing that one- half or more of the flesh and bone has been removed. 
18. WORDS & PHRASES, Vol. 40B, 2002, 333. Substantially: Where purchasing 
corporation, exclusive of cash and other current assets of selling corporation, 
acquired only $38,635.59 of remaining $96,885.40 of selling corporation's assets, or 
about 40% of selling corporation's remaining assets, purchasing corporation did not 
acquire "substantially all" of selling corporation's properties, other than cash, and 
therefore purchasing corporation was not entitled to use earning experience of selling 
corporation in computing purchasing corporation's average base period net income to 
determine its excess profits tax credit. 
19. WORDS & PHRASES, Vol. 40B, 2002, 334. Substantially: Acquisition by newly 
practicing dentist of 75% of assets of business of former dentist was not "substantially all" of assets and, thus, wage and benefit cost experience of both 
dentists would not be considered jointly for purposes of determining new dentist's 
unemployment compensation payments. 
20. Margo Schlanger, (Prof., Law, U. Michigan), HARVARD NATIONAL 
SECURITY JOURNAL, 2015, 178. Rather, the Church Committee's view was on top of FISA itself, executive/congressional disclosure would both minimize the future use of liberty-infringing techniques and facilitate future interventions The Committee made formal findings that Congressional dereliction of oversight responsibilities had --helped shape the environment in which improper intelligence activities were possible.‖ Accordingly, it explained: Procedural safeguards - --auxiliary precautions‖ as they were characterized in the Federalist Papers - must be adopted along with substantive restraints. . . . Our proposed procedural checks range from judicial review of intelligence activity before or after the fact to formal and high level Executive 
branch approval and more effective Congressional oversight. [ellipsis in original] 
21. Monu Bedi, (Prof., Law, DePaul U. College of Law), BOSTON UNIVERSITY 
LAW REVIEW, Dec. 2014, 1874. The government also remains free to acquire the non-content portion of e-mails or the subject line and recipient's name. For one thing, none of these pieces of data are really identifiable in the social networking context. More importantly, this information is not substantive in nature and thus cannot be part of an intimate relationship in the same way a content-laden communication would be. This type of non-content data does not contain any substantive information and so would not garner any special attention. 
38. Joseph Pickett, (Editor)H, AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE 
ENGLISH LANGUAGE, 4T ED., 2006, 533. Domestic: Of or relating to a country's 
internal affairs. 
39. Kathy Rooney, (Editor), ENCARTA WORLD ENGLISH DICTIONARY, 1999, 
531. Domestic: Of a nation's internal affairs; relating to the internal affairs of a nation 
or country. 

40. Joseph Pickett, (Editor),H AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE 
ENGLISH LANGUAGE, 4T ED., 2006, 533. Domestic: Produced in or indigenous 
to a particular country. 
41. Sandra Anderson, (Editor), COLLINS ENGLISH DICTIONARY, 2006, 487. 
Domestic: Of, produced in, or involving one's own country or a specific country. 
42. Angus Stevenson, (Editor), NEW OXFORD AMERICAN DICTIONARY, 3rd 
Ed., 2010, 514. Existing or occurring inside a particular country; not foreign or international. 
43. Stephen Sheppard, (Editor), BOUVIER LAW DICTIONARY, 1067. Electronic 
surveillance: Electronic surveillance is any method of observing, covertly or overtly, the actions and conversations of an individual using electronic technology. It includes the use of wiretaps, pen registers, cover listening, transcribing, or recording devices, direction microphones, videographic surveillance, thermal imaging devices and satellite tracking technology. 
44. Kenneth Ryan, (Prof., Criminology, California State U. at Fresno), PRIVACY 
AND SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 2. Surveillance has been part of the lexicon of espionage for about two centuries. It is rooted in the French surveiller (to watch over) and was first in regular usage about the time that Napoleon Bonaparte tried to conquer Europe at the beginning of the 19th century. In a military context, the word --surveillance‖ became nearly synonymous with --spying.‖ Originally, the word suggested malignant intent toward the subject being watched; therefore, if one was the object of surveillance, it likely was by another who intended to do harm - for example, Napoleon's spies who watched the movements of Russian troops. The negative connotation generally remains today although it's not necessarily deserved. In fact, some surveillance is actually quite beneficial. 
45. MERRIAM WEBSTER'S SCHOOL DICTIONARY, 2015, 997. Surveillance: 
From Latin, vigilare: --watchful.‖ 
46. William Staples, (Prof., Sociology, U. Kansas), EVERYDAY SURVEILLANCE: 
VIGILANCE AND VISIBILITY IN POSTMODERN LIFE, 2014, xiii. The word surveillance, in the most general sense, refers to the act of keeping a close watch on people. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	32 
 
 
 
47. Aaron Doyle, (Prof., Sociology, Carleton U.), EYES EVERYWHERE: THE GLOBAL GROWTH OF CAMERA SURVEILLANCE, 2012, 5. Cameras may be thought to have some natural affinity with surveillance just because the word itself - from the French, surveiller: to watch over - has a visual referent at its core. Thus, especially in the Western world, one finds strong cultural emphases on the importance of visible evidence, of privileging the eye as the most accurate sense, and following from this, a belief in objective knowledge as a criterion of truth. 
48. Alexandra Rengel, (Attorney), INTERCULTURAL HUMAN RIGHTS LAW 
REVIEW, 2013, 193. Surveillance is a type of information collection that affects privacy and consists of monitoring and recording the movements of an individual or group of individuals. 
49. Bryan Garner, (Prof., Law, SMU), BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY, 10th Ed., 
2014, 1674. Surveillance: Close observation or listening of a person or place in the 
hope of gathering evidence. 


66. David Greene, (Sr. Staff Attorney, Electronic Frontier Foundation), NSA MASS SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS: UNNECESSARY AND DISPROPORTIONATE, Apr. 29, 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from https://www.eff.org/files/ 2014/05/29/unnecessary_and_disproportionate.pdf. The US relies on the 
outmoded distinction between --content‖ and --metadata,‖ falsely contending that the 
latter does not reveal private facts about an individual. The US also contends that the collection of data is not surveillance - it argues, contrary to both international law and the Necessary and Proportionate Principles, that an individual's privacy rights are 
not infringed as long as her communications data are not analyzed by a human being. 
67. Ian Rothfuss, (JD Candidate, George Mason U. School of Law), JOURNAL OF 
LAW, ECONOMICS & POLICY, Spr. 2014, 446. The right to privacy is nowhere specifically mentioned in the U.S. Constitution or in the Bill of Rights. Nevertheless, because privacy flows from the general concept that there are certain freedoms beyond the power of the government to restrict, many view the federal Bill of Rights as a firm judicial mandate empowering the courts to protect both enumerated and unenumerated rights. 

50. Joseph Pickett, (Editor),H AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE 
ENGLISH LANGUAGE, 4T ED., 2006, 1743. Surveillance: Close observation of a 
person or group; especially one under suspicion. 
51. Kathy Rooney, (Editor), ENCARTA WORLD ENGLISH DICTIONARY, 1999, 
1797. Surveillance: Continual observation of a person or group, especially one 
suspected of doing something illegal. 
68. Katie Cristina, (JD Candidate, SMU School of Law), JOURNAL OF AIR LAW 
AND COMMERCE, Summer 2013, 630. While the --right to privacy‖ is a familiar phrase to most citizens, much confusion remains with respect to which aspects of --privacy‖ are actually protected and which part of the U.S. Constitution conveys such a right. An element of privacy is seemingly apparent in the First, Third, Fourth, and Fifth Amendments of the U.S. Constitution. While these amendments apply to 

52. Stuart Flexner,D (Editor), RANDOM HOUSE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH 
LANGUAGE, 2N ED., UNABRIDGED, 1987, 1916. Surveillance: A watch kept 
over a person, group, etc. 
53. John Gilliom, (Prof., Political Science, Ohio U.), SUPERVISION: AN 
INTRODUCTION TO THE SURVEILLANCE SOCIETY, 2013, 2. Why do we call this a surveillance society? Because virtually all significant social, institutional, or business activities in our society now involve the systematic monitoring, gathering, and analysis of information in order to make decisions, minimize risk, sort populations, and exercise power. We define surveillance as monitoring people in order to regulate or govern their behavior. 
54. Andrew Sparks, (Editor), WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD COLLEGE 
DICTIONARY, 5TH Ed., 2014, 1460. Surveillance: Constant observation of a place or 
process. 
55. Angus Stevenson, (Editor), NEW OXFORD AMERICAN DICTIONARY, 3rd 
Ed., 2010, 1751. Surveillance: Close observation, esp. of a suspected spy or criminal. 
56. Joseph Pickett, (Editor), AMERICAN HERITAGE DESK DICTIONARY AND 
THESAURUS, 2014, 730. Surveillance: Close observation of a person or group, esp. 
one under suspicion. 
57. MERRIAM WEBSTER'S SCHOOL DICTIONARY, 2015, 997. Surveillance: 
Close watch. 
58. Steven Kleinedler, (Editor), THE AMERICAN HERITAGE COLLEGE 
WRITER'S DICTIONARY, 2013, 946. Surveillance: Close observation of a person or group, especially one under suspicion. 
59. Stephen Sheppard, (Editor), BOUVIER LAW DICTIONARY, 1067. 
Surveillance: Surveillance is the practice of watching, listening, or otherwise sensing the presence or absence of a person, place or thing in a manner than intrudes upon the privacy of the person observed as the object of surveillance or in the presence of the person or thing observed. 
60. William Staples, (Prof., Sociology, U. Kansas), EVERYDAY SURVEILLANCE: 
VIGILANCE AND VISIBILITY IN POSTMODERN LIFE, 2014, 6. At the hard end of the spectrum, DNA samples are being systematically collected on most people who come in contact with the justice system and permanently stored in a vast database. The body, I contend, is a central target of many postmodern surveillance techniques and rituals. 
61. William Staples, (Prof., Sociology, U. Kansas), EVERYDAY SURVEILLANCE: 
VIGILANCE AND VISIBILITY IN POSTMODERN LIFE, 2014, 3. Other --surveillance ceremonies‖ include the use of lie detectors, pre-employment integrity tests, mobile fingerprint scanning, drug and alcohol testing, electronically monitored --house arrest,‖ and the use of metal detectors and various body scanners. 
62. Andrew Talai, (JD, U. California at Berkeley School of Law), CALIFORNIA 
LAW REVIEW, June 2014, 773. Judge Scheindlin's concerns are not uncommon: surveillance has been defined in legal and social science literature as government- sanctioned intrusions on liberty, through systemic means, that lead to --humiliation 
and subjugation.‖ 
63. Alexandra Rengel, (Attorney), INTERCULTURAL HUMAN RIGHTS LAW 
REVIEW, 2013, 186. When almost every activity leaves a digital trail, government and private monitoring becomes less about analog surveillance or human intelligence 
gathering and more a matter of --data mining.‖ 
64. Valerie Redmond, (JD Candidate), FORDHAM INTERNATIONAL LAW 
REVIEW, Apr. 2014, 764-765. First, a significant loophole arises in the interpretation of the term --surveillance.‖ In order for information collection to be regulated by FISA, it must fall under FISA's definition of surveillance. This definition does not apply to certain National Security Letters, which are secret authorizations for the Federal Bureau of Investigation (--FBI‖) to obtain records from telephone companies, credit agencies, and other organizations if they merely certify that the information is relevant to an international terrorism investigation. National Security Letters are regularly used to circumvent FISA's warrant procedures. 
65. Andrew Talai, (JD, U. California at Berkeley School of Law), CALIFORNIA 
LAW REVIEW, June 2014, 772. First, note that a Terry stop is traditionally thought of as a --temporary seizure of the person,‖ not a form of surveillance. 
specific situations in which citizens have a right to be left alone in their affairs, the U.S. Supreme Court has expressly refused to find a --general‖ or broad right to privacy in the Constitution. 
69. G. Michael Fenner, (Prof., Law, Creighton U. School of Law), MONTANA 
LAWYER, Nov/Dec 2014, 17. When thinking about these surveillance cases we tend to jump to the 4th Amendment. Is this an unreasonable search and seizure? Well, in many ways the 4th Amendment is irrelevant here. It is self-executing in criminal trials. There is no trial here. 
70. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 118. Available figures suggest that the percentage of instances in which the NSA accidentally targets a U.S. person or someone in the United States is tiny. In 2013, the DOJ reviewed one year of data to determine the percentage of cases in which the NSA's targeting decisions resulted in the --tasking‖ of a communications identifier that was used by someone in the United States or was a U.S. person. The NSA's error rate, according to this review, was 0.4 percent. Moreover, once a targeting decision has been made, that is not the end of the story. Soon after collection on a selector begins, analysts must review a sample of the communications that have recently been collected, to ensure that the email address or other selector actually is associated with the person whom the NSA intended to target, and that this person is a foreigner located outside the United States. 
71. David Lungren, (U.S. Representative, California), NOTRE DAME JOURNAL 
OF LAW, ETHICS & PUBLIC POLICY, 2012, 455. The necessity of self- preservation exists for the state as a corollary of the rights of those whose consent was necessary to its formation in the first instance. Constitutional governance should not be seen as disabling the state from acting on behalf of those it is obligated to defend. In short, Justice Robert Jackson had it right in observing that the Constitution is not a suicide pact. 
72. John Eastman, (Prof., Law, Chapman U.), PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE 
WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 57. Not once in his article does Greenwald even acknowledge that we are at war with a global enemy bent on destroying us. He does refer to 9/11 as an --attack,‖ but later describes it as a --trauma,‖ as if it were some multi-car highway accident that overloaded the local emergency rooms. Most tellingly, he describes Congress's efforts to kick U.S. surveillance into high gear after the 9/11 attack as --knee-jerk,‖ and bemoans the fact that our surveillance efforts have not abated --even as we approach almost a full decade of emotional and temporal 
distance from that event.‖ 
73. David Sklansky, (Prof., Law, Stanford Law School), CALIFORNIA LAW 
REVIEW, Oct. 2014, 1099. It is worth noting, too, that the most extensive and disruptive mechanisms of surveillance in the Eastern Bloc involved secret agents and informants, not electronic eavesdropping, mail monitoring, or other passive forms of data collection. Secret agents and informants do not just collect information; they do so in a way that dramatically breaches trust and intrudes into intimate confidences. So whatever part of the deadening fear of the state in the Soviet Bloc can be blamed on surveillance must be blamed on a particular kind of surveillance, one that threatens more than informational privacy. 
74. David Sklansky, (Prof., Law, Stanford Law School), CALIFORNIA LAW 
REVIEW, Oct. 2014, 1099. Not only is empirical support for the stultification thesis limited, there is some suggestive evidence against it. That evidence begins with a phenomenon that is all around us: the sharing of personal information on the Internet, especially through social media, and especially by the young. --Our growing collective compulsion to document our lives and share them online‖ strikes many people (particularly if they grew up without the Internet) as both reckless and solipsistic. Moreover, there are frequent suggestions that young people do not understand and appreciate the risks they run by posting material about themselves online. That is doubtless true: they are young. Nevertheless, the porous nature of social media and the susceptibility of Internet communications to uninvited monitoring are not exactly secrets, even among adolescents: they --aren't oblivious to the fact that their digital dossiers are growing as they lead their lives mediated by digital technologies.‖ That is part of why the revelations in 2013 of extensive NSA snooping generated a --collective national shrug.‖ And there are precious few signs that lack of confidentiality has made online communications more guarded or the lives of --digital natives‖ less adventurous or experimental; the indications are rather strongly to the contrary. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	33 
 
 
 
75. David Sklansky, (Prof., Law, Stanford Law School), CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW, Oct. 2014, 1099. Digital natives may think differently about privacy than their elders. (For one thing, they are likely to worry more about monitoring by their parents than by the government or by corporations.) Reasons to doubt the stultification thesis are not limited to the young, though. For example, a study of government employees in Canada suggested that freedom of information laws - contrary to fears - do not affect the quantity or the quality of record-keeping or intra- governmental communication. That will come as little surprise to anyone who uses email on a workplace network subject to employer monitoring: evidence of self- censorship on such networks is difficult to find. 
76. David Sklansky, (Prof., Law, Stanford Law School), CALIFORNIA LAW 
REVIEW, Oct. 2014, 1099. People quickly become accustomed to monitoring and then ignore it. Something similar happens when criminal suspects are recorded when talking to the police. Law enforcement officials often oppose the recording of interrogations, because they fear that it will deter candor. In practice, though, it has virtually no effect: minutes after the recording device is turned on, the suspect forgets about it. And despite Justice Harlan's warning that warrantless, surreptitious recording of conversations by confidential informants --might well smother [the] spontaneity . . . that liberates daily life,‖ we have now lived with that practice for four decades, and it has had no observable impact on the vigor of national discourse. 
[ellipsis in original] 
77. David Sklansky, (Prof., Law, Stanford Law School), CALIFORNIA LAW 
REVIEW, Oct. 2014, 1102. There is no way we could ever exercise anything close to complete control over the dissemination and use of information about ourselves, and neither would anyone want to live in a society where that was possible. 
78. Robert Litt, (General Counsel, Office of the Director of National Intelligence), IC 
ON THE RECORD, Mar. 17, 2014. Retrieved Feb. 8, 2015 from http://icontherecord.tumblr.com/post/79998577649/as-prepared-for-delivery-remarks- of- odni-general. In fact, it is noteworthy that in all the material that has been leaked so far, there is no evidence of any systematic abuses, of willful attempts to violate the law, or of the use of intelligence for political or other improper purposes. Nothing 
that has been revealed approaches the abuses of intelligence that were revealed in the 
1970s, and any comparison to those abuses is reckless hyperbole. 
79. Stewart Baker, (Attorney, Steptoe & Johnson, LLP), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 72-73. But if in fact abuses were common, we'd know it by now. Today, law enforcement agencies collect several hundred thousand telephone billing records a year using nothing but a subpoena. That means you're roughly a thousand times more likely to have your telephone calling patterns reviewed by a law enforcement agency than by NSA. (And the chance that law enforcement will look at your records is itself low, around 0.25% in the case of one carrier‖). So it appears that law enforcement has been gaining access to our call metadata for as long as billing records have existed - nearly a century. If this were the road to Orwell's 1984, surely we'd he there by now, and without any help from NSA's 300 searches. 
80. Fred Kaplan, (Fellow, Council on Foreign Relations), SALT LAKE TRIBUNE, 
Jan. 20, 2014. Retrieved Apr. 20, 2015 from Nexis. The presidential commission's Dec. 12 report made this point explicitly. The panelists found no evidence that the National Security Agency had used its surveillance technologies in ways that violated the civil liberties of American citizens. Their big warning was that, in the future, some high-level officials - a Nixon-like president or a J. Edgar Hoover-like director - might "decide that this massive database of extraordinarily sensitive private 
information is there for the plucking." 
81. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 118. To date, the DOJ/ODNI oversight team has not discovered any instances in which an analyst intentionally violated the statute, targeting procedures, or minimization procedures. In the history of the program, the government has identified only two instances of --reverse targeting‖ - that is, the prohibited targeting of overseas foreigners for the purpose of acquiring the communications of persons in the United States with whom they are in contact. 
82. Robert Litt, (General Counsel, Office of the Director of National Intelligence), IC 
ON THE RECORD, Mar. 17, 2014. Retrieved Feb. 8, 2015 from http://icontherecord.tumblr.com/post/79998577649/as-prepared-for-delivery-remarks- of- odni-general. But what's most striking to me about the leaks that have taken place over the past few months is that they've really not been about whistleblowing at all. None of the leaks have shown that the government was engaged in any willful violation of law; even those who disagree with some of the legal analysis supporting our activities must acknowledge that they were deemed lawful by the FISA Court, the Department of Justice and the lawyers in the Intelligence Community. None of the leaks have shown that the Intelligence Community was doing things that were hidden from the Congress or the courts. Instead, the leakers' argument appears to be that the Intelligence Community was engaging in behavior that they disagree with as a matter of policy. That's hardly a justification for the risks to national security that these leaks have caused. 
83. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 115. First, in the criminal or FISA context the targets of surveillance must be believed to be criminals or agents of a foreign power. That means that innocent U.S. persons need not worry about the government listening to their phone conversations or reading their emails except to the extent that they are communicating with suspected criminals or agents of foreign powers. 


84. Robert Mueller, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), OVERSIGHT OF THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, June 19, 2013, 20. Well, certainly if you look at 215, the significant figures, you do have a database. It just has metadata in it, numbers, it does not have any information with regard to who. It has those particular numbers, no content. You have just 22 persons who have access to this, to run the name - not the names, but run the numbers against the database, 20 analysts and two supervisors. And last year, there were only 300 inquiries, approximately 300 inquiries made into that database. You then have overlapping and the overlay of oversight from the Department of Justice, the IG's office, the FISA Court that renews 215 every 90 days, and then, finally, the oversight from Congress. So each of the three branches of government have a role in assuring that privacy interests are protected here. 
85. David Lungren, (U.S. Representative, California), NOTRE DAME JOURNAL 
OF LAW, ETHICS & PUBLIC POLICY, 2012, 455. The 9/11 Commission itself anticipated this issue with great foresight in observing that "the choice between security and liberty is a false choice, as nothing is more likely to endanger America's liberties than the success of a terrorist attack at home." Judge Posner explains the interrelationship between security and civil liberties: Civil libertarians neglect a genuine lesson of history: that the greatest danger to American civil liberties would be another terrorist attack on the United States, even if it was on a smaller scale than the 9/11 attacks - but it could be on the same or even a much larger scale. 
86. Richard Clarke et al. (Chair, President's Review Group on Intelligence and 
Communications Technologies), LIBERTY AND SECURITY IN A CHANGING WORLD, Dec. 12, 2013, 72. Fifth, the threat of massive terrorist attacks involving nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons can generate a chilling and destructive environment of fear and anxiety among our nation's citizens. If Americans came to believe that we are infiltrated by enemies we cannot identify and who have the power to bring death, destruction, and chaos to our lives on a massive scale, and that preventing such attacks is beyond the capacity of our government, the quality of national life would be greatly imperiled. Indeed, if a similar or even more devastating attack were to occur in the future, there would almost surely be an impulse to increase the use of surveillance technology to prevent further strikes, despite the potentially corrosive effects on individual freedom and self-governance. 
87. Rachel Brand, (Member, Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board), 
EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 185. After September 11, 2001, the public demanded to know why the government had not stopped those attacks. Fingers were pointed in every direction, and civil liberties and privacy considerations took a backseat in the public debate immediately following the attacks. Of course, the legal structure under which the agencies operated prior to 9/11 had been put into place in the 1970s as a reaction to the Church Committee's revelations of prior excesses and abuses by the Intelligence Community. Since the recent leaks of classified programs, the pendulum seems to be swinging sharply back in that direction. But I have no doubt that if there is another large-scale terrorist attack against the United States, the public will engage in recriminations against the Intelligence Community for failure to prevent it. 
88. David Brin, (Ph.D., Space Science, U. California at San Diego), NEW YORK 
TIMES, July 25, 2013. Retrieved Apr. 13, 2015 from Nexis. Lesson No. 3: Bad things like 9/11 will happen. When they do, members of our protector caste will claim they might have thwarted calamity if provided greater powers to see, know, analyze, anticipate and reach. Amid panic and public alarm, those powers will be granted. 
89. Richard Wike, (Dir., Global Attitudes Research, Pew Research Center), 
GLOBAL OPPOSITION TO U.S. SURVEILLANCE AND DRONES, July 14, 2014, 24-25. The share of the U.S. public that says Washington respects personal freedoms has declined from 69% in 2013 to 63% in 2014. Nevertheless, half or more of the public in 33 of 44 nations surveyed still think that Washington safeguards Americans' freedoms. The U.S. image as a protector of personal liberties remains quite strong in a number of Asian nations: South Korea (91%), Philippines (87%), Japan (84%) and Vietnam (75%); and also in the Middle East: Lebanon (84%) and Israel (75%). And in many societies, the younger generation is much more likely than their elders to see the U.S. as a defender of domestic liberties. This is particularly true in Uganda, where there is a 20-point generation gap on this measure, and Russia with a 19-point difference. 
90. Simon Davies, (Associate Dir., LSE Enterprise, London School of Economics), A 
CRISIS OF ACCOUNTABILITY: A GLOBAL ANALYSIS OF THE IMPACT OF THE SNOWDEN REVELATIONS, June 2014, 6. Possibly in part because of the predominant US focus in reporting, media coverage of the relevant issues has declined globally to less than two percent of the initial traffic of a year ago - and continues to diminish. As a consequence, public concern about the issues raised by the disclosures has - at best - reached a plateau. This drop-off is particularly steep in non-US and non-English language media. 
91. Richard Wike, (Dir., Global Attitudes Research, Pew Research Center), 
GLOBAL OPPOSITION TO U.S. SURVEILLANCE AND DRONES, July 14, 2014, 4. Revelations about the scope of American electronic surveillance efforts have generated headlines around the world over the past year. And a new Pew Research Center survey finds widespread global opposition to U.S. eavesdropping and a decline in the view that the U.S. respects the personal freedoms of its people. But in most countries there is little evidence this opposition has severely harmed America's overall image. 
92. Mark Young, (Sr. Vice President, National Security Partners), I/S: A JOURNAL 
OF LAW AND POLICY FOR THE INFORMATION SOCIETY, Summer 2014, 369-370. Regardless of one's sympathy for Snowden's conclusion, the scope and scale of the material he has revealed will have a continuing impact on U.S. national security. There are four areas where his actions will diminish national security. First, the disclosure of the programs, relationships, and operations will facilitate operational changes in the behavior of adversarial groups such as al-Qaeda and Hamas. It will become more difficult, more expensive, and more time consuming to collect and 
analyze information on terrorist groups, foreign governments, and foreign militaries. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	34 
 
 
 
93. Mark Young, (Sr. Vice President, National Security Partners), I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY FOR THE INFORMATION SOCIETY, Summer 2014, 370. Second, the [Snowden] disclosures will complicate U.S. foreign relations that directly contribute to U.S. security interests. Cooperation between U.S. and foreign intelligence organizations is critical to the security of the U.S. Other countries are perpetually concerned about disclosing sensitive information collected by their intelligence services. Snowden has now exacerbated these concerns and weakened traditionally strong American assurances that information provided to the U.S. will be well protected with little risk of embarrassment or compromise to the providing country. It will become more difficult to cooperate with these partners when there is a stream of evidence that shows that the U.S. cannot keep a secret. 
94. Mark Young, (Sr. Vice President, National Security Partners), I/S: A JOURNAL 
OF LAW AND POLICY FOR THE INFORMATION SOCIETY, Summer 2014, 370. Third, Snowden's actions have impaired cooperation between the United States government and the U.S. private sector. It was already challenging to share information between the U.S. public and private sectors, but the exposure of alleged relationships - whether voluntary or pursuant to a court order-between companies such as Verizon, Google, and Facebook has made corporate entities recoil from the 
U.S. government in fear of a diminished reputation or decline in stock value. 
95. Mark Young, (Sr. Vice President, National Security Partners), I/S: A JOURNAL 
OF LAW AND POLICY FOR THE INFORMATION SOCIETY, Summer 2014, 382. It is likely that terrorist groups will change how they conceive, plan, and execute terrorist attacks as a result of the classified intelligence information now exposed to the public. Terrorist groups continuously adjust their methodologies for attacking their targets, but the recent disclosures provide a roadmap for terror groups to avoid detection. 
96. Mark Young, (Sr. Vice President, National Security Partners), I/S: A JOURNAL 
OF LAW AND POLICY FOR THE INFORMATION SOCIETY, Summer 2014, 386. Snowden's disclosures have already changed terror group's practices making it more difficult for U.S. intelligence agencies to provide warnings about terror groups' plans and intentions. The loss of insight into these targets diminishes U.S. security, but also prevents the U.S. from sharing information with its allies and partners, diminishing U.S. global influence. The net effect of Snowden's disclosures is to increase terrorist consciousness of their own vulnerabilities. Their response has been immediate and may have a dangerous cumulative effect. 
97. Mark Young, (Sr. Vice President, National Security Partners), I/S: A JOURNAL 
OF LAW AND POLICY FOR THE INFORMATION SOCIETY, Summer 2014, 398. The Snowden disclosures are undermining an already tense relationship between the U.S. and Pakistan. The illegal disclosures will likely reduce intelligence sharing and military cooperation at a time when threats for both countries are still extremely grave. The disclosures have diminished U.S. national security by damaging the diplomatic and intelligence relationship with a key ally in a region from whence one of the greatest attacks against the U.S. originated. 
98. Stewart Baker, (Attorney, Steptoe & Johnson, LLP), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 74. And this was never meant to be a fair debate. Snowden and his allies in the press had copies of the minimization and targeting guidelines; they surely knew that the guidelines made the programs look far more responsible. So they suppressed them, waiting a full two weeks - while the controversy grew and took the shape they preferred before releasing the documents. Since no self- respecting reporter withholds relevant information from the public, it's only fair to conclude that this was an act of advocacy, not journalism. Perhaps the reporters lost their bearings; perhaps the timing was controlled by advocates. Either way, the public was manipulated, not informed. 
99. Stewart Baker, (Attorney, Steptoe & Johnson, LLP), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 71. That provides a useful frame for the most surprising disclosure made by Edward Snowden - that NSA collects telephone metadata (e.g., the called number, calling number, duration of call, etc., but not the call content) for all calls into, out of or within the United States. Out of context - and Snowden worked hard to make sure it was taken out of context - this is a troubling disclosure, How can all of that data possibly be --relevant to an authorized investigation‖ as the law requires? But context is everything here. It turns out that collecting the data isn't the same as actually looking at it. Robert Litt, General Counsel of the Director for National Intelligence, has made clear that there are court-ordered rules designed to make sure that government officials only look at relevant records: --The metadata that is acquired and kept under this program can only be queried when there is reasonable suspicion, based on specific articulable facts, that a particular telephone number is associated with specified foreign terrorist organizations. And the only purpose for which we can make the query is to identity contacts. 
100. Jack Goldsmith, (Prof., Law, Harvard Law School), POWER AND 
CONSTRAINT: THE ACCOUNTABLE PRESIDENCY AFTER 9/11, 2012, 206. The direction of the panopticon can be reversed, however, creating a --synopticon‖ in which many can watch one, including the government. The television is a synopticon that enables millions to watch the same governmental speech or hearing, though it is not a terribly robust one because the government can control the broadcast. Digital technology and the Internet combine to make a more powerful synopticon that allows many individuals to record and watch an official event or document in sometimes surprising ways. Video recorders placed in police stations and police cars, cell-phone video cameras, and similar tools increase citizens' ability to watch and record government activity. This new media content can be broadcast on the Internet and through other channels to give citizens synoptical power over the government - a power that some describe as --sousveillance‖ (watching from below). These and related forms of watching can have a disciplining effect on government akin to Brin's reciprocal transparency. 


101. Robert Mueller, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), OVERSIGHT OF THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, June 19, 2013, 33. The only other thing I would say is that there are going to be additional terrorist attacks. One of the most debilitating things for those of us in this particular - in our positions is to try your darnedest to prevent it but there be an attack, and then you are immediately attacked for why didn't you do more. And we always believe, regardless of the attack, that it is incumbent upon us and others to go back and do a scrub and see what we could have done better. But the tone of how you do that and the way that you do it would be helpful to those of us who worry about this day and night. 
102. Matthew Burow, (JD Candidate), NEW ENGLAND JOURNAL ON 
CRIMINAL AND CIVIL CONFINEMENT, Spr. 2013, 445. As the twentieth- century French philosopher Michel Foucault observed, the major effect of the Panopticon is --to induce in the inmate a state of conscious and permanent visibility that assures the automatic functioning of power.‖ In Bentham's vision, there is no need for prison bars, chains or heavy locks; the person who is subjected to the field of visibility of the omnipresent guard plays both roles and he becomes the subject of his own subjection. For Foucault, this --panopticism‖ was not necessarily bad when compared to other methods of exercising control as this sort of --subtle coercion‖ could lead people to be more productive and efficient members of society. Following Foucault's reasoning, an omnipresent UAS circling above a city may be similar to a Panopticon guard tower and an effective way of keeping the peace. The mere thought of detection may keep streets safer and potential criminals at bay. 
103. John Gilliom, (Prof., Political Science, Ohio U.), SUPERVISION: AN 
INTRODUCTION TO THE SURVEILLANCE SOCIETY, 2013, 22. Whereas Foucault thought that reproducing the panopticon model throughout societies would subject everyone to a uniform disciplining gaze, surveillance systems today are geared more toward finding or creating differences among people and sorting them into finely differentiated categories (according to risk, value, preference, class, status, age, sex, race, and so on). So we're quite unlike the prisoners in the panopticon. 
104. John Gilliom, (Prof., Political Science, Ohio U.), SUPERVISION: AN 
INTRODUCTION TO THE SURVEILLANCE SOCIETY, 2013, 22-23. The central idea is that there is no central force: no Big Brother, no panopticon, but a shifting, moving observation, presentation, and regulation of the self by countless measures in countless locations. Your cell phone is a great example of this. At a surveillance extreme, your location, calls dialed and received, call contents, text messages, music, videos, photos, and all other transactions can be monitored or tracked by a shifting array of friends, family, service providers, private detectives, the police, or random strangers who find your phone. 
105. Jack Goldsmith, (Prof., Law, Harvard Law School), POWER AND 
CONSTRAINT: THE ACCOUNTABLE PRESIDENCY AFTER 9/11, 2012, 26. Learning firsthand about the nature of the terror threat and the soundness of some of the Bush responses to it was a wake-up call for the young Obama administration. So too was the grim reality of presidential responsibility, which informed how these new facts would be interpreted. On January 20, 2009, Barack Obama went from a legislator and presidential candidate with no real national security experience or responsibility to the Commander in Chief whose counterterrorism decisions hold American lives in the balance. 
106. Jack Goldsmith, (Prof., Law, Harvard Law School), POWER AND 
CONSTRAINT: THE ACCOUNTABLE PRESIDENCY AFTER 9/11, 2012, 26-27. This new perspective had a profound impact on Obama, just as it does on every President. --My single most important responsibility as President is to keep the American people safe,‖ he said, three months into his presidency, sounding very much like George W. Bush. --It's the first thing that I think about when I wake up in the morning. It's the last thing that I think about when I go to sleep at night.‖ The personal responsibility of the President for national security, combined with the continuing reality of a frightening and difficult-to-detect threat, unsurprisingly led Obama, like Bush, to use the full arsenal of presidential tools. --He is a different man now,‖ said Washington sage David Broder, explaining the psychological dimension that underlies Obama's Bush-copying policies. --He has learned what it means to be 
commander in chief.‖ 
107. Barack Obama, (President's Speech on NSA Surveillance), THE NEW YORK 
TIMES, Jan. 18, 2014. Retrieved Apr. 14, 2015 from Nexis. To the contrary, in an extraordinarily difficult job - one in which actions are second-guessed, success is unreported, and failure can be catastrophic - the men and women of the intelligence community, including the NSA, consistently follow protocols designed to protect the privacy of ordinary people. They're not abusing authorities in order to listen to your private phone calls or read your emails. When mistakes are made - which is inevitable in any large and complicated human enterprise - they correct those mistakes. 
108. Stewart Baker, (Attorney, Steptoe & Johnson, LLP), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 76. On occasion, the survival of the country may depend on good intelligence. Wars are won and lives are lost when intelligence succeeds or fails. Nations do whatever they can to collect information that might affect their future so dramatically. After a long era of national naivete, when we thought that gentlemen didn't read other gentlemen's mail and when intercepting even diplomatic radio signals was illegal, the United States found itself thrust by World War II and the Cold War into the intelligence business, and now we play by the same rules as the rest of the world. 
109. Richard Clarke et al., (Chair, President's Review Group on Intelligence and 
Communications Technologies), LIBERTY AND SECURITY IN A CHANGING WORLD, Dec. 12, 2013, 163. Intelligence, particularly signals intelligence, is as necessary now as ever to combat violent extremism, prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, combat international criminal groups, prevent atrocities, and enforce UN sanctions and other international regimes. With the passage of a dozen years since the attacks of September 11, 2001, the threat from al-Qa'ida and similar groups has changed, but it remains significant. For example, recent years have seen the spread of al-Qa'ida-related groups to large swaths of Africa and the Middle East. We have also witnessed a rise in --Lone Wolf‖ terrorism, including in the United States. There is a continuing need for appropriate intelligence collection, data analysis, and information-sharing with appropriate personnel. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	35 
 
 
110. Richard Clarke et al. (Chair, President's Review Group on Intelligence and 
Communications Technologies), LIBERTY AND SECURITY IN A CHANGING WORLD, Dec. 12, 2013, 75. A wide range of intelligence collectors, including NSA, have made important contributions to protecting the nation's security. Notwithstanding recent controversies, and the importance of significant reforms, the national security of the United States depends on the continued capacity of NSA and other agencies to collect essential information. In considering proposals for reform, now and for the future, policymakers should avoid the risk of overreaction and take care in making changes that could undermine the capabilities of the Intelligence Community. 
111. John Gilliom, (Prof., Political Science, Ohio U.), SUPERVISION: AN 
INTRODUCTION TO THE SURVEILLANCE SOCIETY, 2013, 135. A few pages back, we argued that living in surveillance societies breeds an expectation that someone will be watching us. A counterpart is that we also come to hope someone is watching out for us. It's a scary world out there. When we walk in fear, we not only don't resent the surveillance that increasingly pervades our lives; we appreciate it. Particular moments of crisis augment and focus our fear and legitimate new mechanisms and practices of surveillance. There are a host of new technologies in development at any given time - they're demonstrated at security trade shows and pushed in professional magazines and conventions. When the next big crisis comes along, some company will be ready with the amazing new technological fix that will make us feel safe again. 
112. John Gilliom, (Prof., Political Science, Ohio U.), SUPERVISION: AN 
INTRODUCTION TO THE SURVEILLANCE SOCIETY, 2013, 4. It also shows that the seemingly heartless and technocratic surveillance that shapes our times has the potential to be a wonderful and liberating thing. It can make it more difficult for personal power and racism to affect important decisions. Modern surveillance can also make it easier to catch dangerous criminals. It can help first responders find locations and rescue people. 
113. Thomas Carper, (U.S. Senator, Delaware), THREATS TO THE HOMELAND, 
Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 1. Our aviation system is more secure. Our borders are stronger. Our government agencies share more terrorist intelligence than ever before. Our first responders are better prepared to deal with disasters and terrorist attacks. Americans are safer because of these efforts. 
114. Richard Clarke et al. (Chair, President's Review Group on Intelligence and 
Communications Technologies), LIBERTY AND SECURITY IN A CHANGING WORLD, Dec. 12, 2013, 43. By their very nature, terrorist attacks tend to involve covert, decentralized actors who participate in plots that may not be easy to identify or disrupt. Surveillance can protect, and has protected, against such plots. But protection of national security includes a series of additional goals, prominently including counter-intelligence and counter-proliferation. It also includes support for military operations. Amidst serious military conflicts, surveillance can be an indispensable means of protecting the lives of those who serve or fight for our nation, and also (and it is important to emphasize this point) for our friends and allies. 
115. Georg Mascolo, (Visiting Scholar, Weatherhead Center for International Affairs, 
Harvard University), LESSONS FROM THE SUMMER OF SNOWDEN, Oct. 2013, 3. Surveillance as a tool of law enforcement and intelligence gathering is, of course, nothing new. And within appropriate limits, it is a powerful tool to detect, expose, and thwart criminals and threats to national security. According to intelligence sources, over 80 percent of information about terrorist threats comes from signals intelligence. Threats to public safety and national security are very real, and the interception of communications is a necessary and indispensable tool for law enforcement. 
116. John Gilliom, (Prof., Political Science, Ohio U.), SUPERVISION: AN 
INTRODUCTION TO THE SURVEILLANCE SOCIETY, 2013, 9-10. Scientific rationalism is the dominant mentality of our time, leading to an insatiable hunger for information. Because of this, organizations are almost always pro-surveillance. Governments, corporations, courts, and individuals all seek information so they can make smart choices. This is in many ways the modern definition of responsible decision making. 
117. John Gilliom, (Prof., Political Science, Ohio U.), SUPERVISION: AN 
INTRODUCTION TO THE SURVEILLANCE SOCIETY, 2013, 20-21. For most of us, the government is not a despotic totalitarian force watching our every move for the slightest sign of deviation. For most of us, surveillance comes not from a unitary state bent only on domination and control, but from a chaotic blend of government, media, work, friends, family, insurance companies, bankers, and automated data- processing systems. Much of the surveillance in our lives is non-threatening - hardly the sense we get from Orwell's classic dystopia. 
118. Barack Obama, (President's Speech on NSA Surveillance), THE NEW YORK 
TIMES, Jan. 18, 2014. Retrieved Apr. 14, 2015 from Nexis. At the dawn of our Republic, a small, secret surveillance committee borne out of the ''The Sons of Liberty'' was established in Boston. And the group's members included Paul Revere. At night, they would patrol the streets, reporting back any signs that the British were preparing raids against America's early Patriots. Throughout American history, intelligence has helped secure our country and our freedoms. In the Civil War, Union balloon reconnaissance tracked the size of Confederate armies by counting the number of campfires. In World War II, code-breakers gave us insights into Japanese war plans, and when Patton marched across Europe, intercepted communications helped save the lives of his troops. After the war, the rise of the Iron Curtain and nuclear weapons only increased the need for sustained intelligence gathering. And so, in the early days of the Cold War, President Truman created the National Security Agency, or NSA, to give us insights into the Soviet bloc, and provide our leaders with information they needed to confront aggression and avert catastrophe. 


119. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/]publication/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. Broad surveillance of communications is the least intrusive method and most effective means for discovering terrorist activity. The alternatives to mass surveillance are straightforward. Countries can replace communications surveillance by increasing the number of security service personnel responsible for monitoring terrorism or they can 
decrease surveillance and accept some increase in the level of risk of a successful 
attack. The dilemma with choosing this course of action is that the number of agents required to replace communications surveillance is expensive and overtly intrusive in a way the communications surveillance is not. Hundreds of thousands of additional agents would be required to provide national coverage, may lack sufficient global reach to detect activity being planned or undertaken outside U.S. territory, and the 
creation of such a large force risks creating a much greater chilling effect on liberties 
120. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE 
DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]
tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. Mass surveillance serves counterterrorism purposes. It provides a means of identifying terrorists and their networks for targeted collection. The mass collection programs conducted by NSA were done in cooperative arrangements with European security services and those of other nations; that this was largely unknown to European populations and legislatures is more a reflection of the weaknesses of the oversight of their own intelligence activities by Europeans. 
121. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE 
DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/]
publication/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. The missing aspect of the Snowden discussion is that mass surveillance programs conducted by NSA in Europe were done in cooperation with European security services. Because European nations lack adequate oversight mechanisms for intelligence, the signal greatest inaccuracy in the Snowden debate is the failure to recognize that mass surveillance programs were done in cooperation with European partners to prevent terrorist incidents, part of a larger program of cooperation on counterterrorism. Information on these cooperative relationships is not easily found in public sources and it is not in the interests of those 
handling the Snowden material to highlight this cooperative aspect. European 
governments cooperated with NSA because it provided global capabilities that significantly improved their counterterrorism capabilities. 
122. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. Espionage is not the best way to engage with Germany on the ambivalent attitude of many of its citizens toward the United States or nostalgie de la boue [nostalgia] when it comes to Soviet Russia, but 
it is difficult to think of another former leader of a major power who is on Vladimir 
Putin's payroll. German military sales to China could justify U.S. espionage. Germany is not alone among European nations in making such sales, but sales such as the transfer of quiet diesel submarine engines from a German firm to China is troubling. 
123. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. One central issue is whether the 
notion that --friends don't spy on friends‖ makes any sense. Germany might actually 
follow the rule that friends do not spy on friends, but that would make it practically unique in the world. A recent internal review by the United States ranked France, for example, as the fourth-most-active nation engaged in economic espionage against it (the others were, in order, China, Russia, and another ally). In the mid-1990s, the director of central intelligence traveled to Paris to warn that French espionage was reaching intolerable levels. There are other less public anecdotes that go back decades and make it clear that friends do indeed spy on friends. This does not mean that France (or the other ally) was not a friend. There is strong and essential cooperation with France on key security issues. It is a valued partner for the United States. 
124. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. Contrary to the assertions of Brazil's president at the UN General Assembly, U.S. actions were not a violation of the customary practice among states, which routinely spy on each other. Brazil itself engages in espionage, along with widespread surveillance of its own population with almost no oversight. Nor were U.S. actions illegal under international law. There is no international treaty on espionage, nor is it prohibited. International law studiously 
ignores espionage that, by definition, is an agent of one country, operating legally 
under that country's laws, violating the laws of another country. Countries may dislike being spied upon, but it is not illegal. 
125. Lothar Determann, (Prof., Law, U. California's Hastings College of Law). 
HASTINGS CONSTITUTIONAL LAW QUARTERLY, May 2014, 27. The NSA is probably violating myriad foreign countries' laws, because all countries prohibit foreign spying against themselves. Yet, this hardly justifies the current outrage abroad. The complaining countries are running similar programs. Moreover, many actually actively collaborate with the NSA and other U.S. authorities in the interest of getting help to protect their own national security. 
126. Stewart Baker, (Attorney, Steptoe & Johnson, LLP), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 77. Shortly after President Hollande demanded that the U.S. --immediately stop‖ its intercepts and the French Interior Minister used his position as guest of honor at a July 4th celebration to chide the United States for its intercepts, Le Monde disclosed what both French officials well knew that France has its own 
program for large-scale interception of international telecommunications traffic. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	36 
 
 
 
127. Georg Mascolo, (Visiting Scholar, Weatherhead Center for International Affairs, Harvard University), LESSONS FROM THE SUMMER OF SNOWDEN, Oct. 2013, 5. Though it may come as a surprise to many European citizens, the laws used to authorize surveillance programs in EU countries are comparable to those in the US. Foreigners are legitimate targets for surveillance under broadly defined national security purposes. In many cases, this is not limited to counter-terrorism but applies to foreign intelligence information more generally as it relates to public safety. Typically, local citizens are protected by a higher standard of privacy, but they are not exempt from surveillance. Intelligence agencies gain access to the telecommunications networks that physically cross their territory. And the companies that own the upstream networks and data storage/processing facilities are required by law to cooperate. There are no clear minimum standards of operational protection, even inside of Europe. 
128. Ben Hayes, (Fellow, Transnational Institute). STATE OF SURVEILLANCE: 
THE NSA FILES AND THE GLOBAL FIGHTBACK, 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://statewatch.org/news/2014/jan/state-of-surveillance-chapter.pdf. The  [HYPERLINK: http://statewatch.org/news/2014/jan/state-of-surveillance-chapter.pdf]French government described the NSA's practices as --totally unacceptable‖ before including provisions in the Defence Bill 2014-2019 that grant its own intelligence services expanded powers to record telephone conversations, access emails, location and other --metadata‖ - with no judicial oversight whatsoever. 
129. Lothar Determann, (Prof., Law, U. California's Hastings College of Law). 
HASTINGS CONSTITUTIONAL LAW QUARTERLY, May 2014, 16. To a large degree, the foreign government outrage in the wake of disclosures like Snowden's appear to be stirred up by embarrassment rather than genuine surprise or concern of the surveillance itself. 
130. Ellen Nakashima, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, Jan. 18, 2014, A1. As he 
made the case for reforms, Obama also cautioned that "we cannot unilaterally disarm our intelligence agencies." And he caustically criticized foreign intelligence services that "feign surprise" over disclosures of U.S. surveillance while "constantly probing our government and private sector networks and accelerating programs to listen to 
our conversations, intercept our e-mails or compromise our systems." 
131. John Inglis, (Deputy U.S. Attorney General), THE ADMINISTRATION'S USE 
OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 11. The men and women at NSA are not simply committed to compliance with the law and the protection of privacy and civil liberties, but they are actively trained and must be held accountable to standards for that performance. This is also true of contractors. The actions of one contractor should not tarnish all contractors because they also do great work for our Nation. 
132. Lance Hoffman, (Dir., Cyber Security Policy and Research Institute, George 
Washington U.), UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW, Mar. 2012, 1048. The Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 amended the definition of a "foreign power or agent of a foreign power" by adding the "Lone Wolf" Amendment. Under FISA, the "Lone Wolf" Amendment makes a non-United States person who engages in international terrorism or activities in preparation for international terrorism an "agent of a foreign power" regardless of that individual's actual status. 
133. David Lungren, (U.S. Representative, California), NOTRE DAME JOURNAL 
OF LAW, ETHICS & PUBLIC POLICY, 2012, 451. Acting Assistant Attorney General for the National Security Division, Todd Hinnen, explained the lone wolf provision: For example, it might allow surveillance when an individual acts based upon international terrorist recruitment and training on the internet without establishing a connection to any terrorist group. It might also be used when a member of an international group, perhaps dispatched to the United States to form an operational cell, breaks with the group but nonetheless continues to plot or prepare for acts of international terrorism. 
134. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Mason U.), STATE OF FEDERAL 
PRIVACY AND DATA SECURITY LAW: LAGGING BEHIND THE TIMES?, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2012, 108. Often the factors that form part of the analysis cannot be revealed, and successes in identifying terrorist suspects - or, in other contexts, members of a criminal organization - would be negated by disclosure of the success. 
135. Lawrence Friedman, (Prof., Law, New England School of Law), WILLIAM 
MITCHELL LAW REVIEW, 2012, 1611. In Necessary Secrets, Gabriel Schoenfeld argues that secrecy in governmental affairs is "an essential prerequisite of self- governance." "And," he continues, "when one turns to the most fundamental business of democratic governance, namely, self-preservation - carried out through conduct of foreign policy and the waging of war - the imperative of secrecy becomes critical, often a matter of survival." Indeed, he maintains, "even in times of peace, the 
formulation of foreign and defense policies is necessarily conducted in secret." 
136. Robert Mueller, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), OVERSIGHT OF THE 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, June 19, 2013, 25. Now, when you talk about transparency to the American public, you are going to give up something. You are going to be giving signals to our adversaries as to what our capabilities are. And the more specific you get about the programs and the more specific you get about the oversight, the more specific you get about the capabilities and the successes, to that extent you have people sitting around saying, okay, now I understand what can be done with our numbers in Yemen and in the United States, and consequently I am going to find another way to communicate, and I am going to keep that in my mind. And so there is a price to be paid for that transparency. 
137. Lothar Determann, (Prof., Law, U. California's Hastings College of Law). 
HASTINGS CONSTITUTIONAL LAW QUARTERLY, May 2014, 16. Some commentators suggest that increased government transparency should be the basis of further discussion and cost-benefit analyses regarding intelligence-gathering program reform. The probability of achieving this goal seems limited given the potential adverse impact transparency could have on successful intelligence gathering and on diplomatic relations among nations, due to the sensitive nature of intelligence gathering. While transparency is easier to communicate from a political standpoint, it bears the risk of populism. Instead, a turn in the opposite direction may be more promising. Secret services should be kept more secret. 


138. Samuel Rascoff, (Prof., Law, NYU School of Law), NEW YORK UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, June 2014, 852. On one level, public laws are exercises in revelation. For example, while reports of the details of the NSA Prism program created a sensation, the FISA Amendments Act of 2008 (hardly a secret document) seems to have authorized the collection in question. On the other hand, legal interpretations that are crucial to the oversight of national security programs - such as opinions of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) or the Justice Department's memorandum authorizing a lethal strike against American citizen Anwar al-Aulaqi - have been withheld. Part of the reasoning is that these legal analyses themselves contain secrets or that in a world in which government is expected to operate at the outer limits of legal authority, to disclose those limits publicly is, in effect, to reveal national security secrets. On this view, to maintain strategic ambiguity, it is necessary to be vague about legal interpretation. In sum, new deterrence subtly refocuses the debate away from a zero-sum contest between secrecy and transparency and toward a more nuanced account. 
139. Ian Rothfuss, (JD Candidate, George Mason U. School of Law), JOURNAL OF 
LAW, ECONOMICS & POLICY, Spr. 2014, 452-453. Surveillance promotes security through a combination of prevention and deterrence of harm. Prevention includes law enforcement interventions that prevent crime and interventions that enhance public safety, such as preventing swimmers from drowning or children from being hit by cars. Surveillance has a deterrent effect since the information gathered increases the probability of punishment for criminals. Assuming the presence of surveillance is known, potential criminals will be less likely to commit crimes since they know authorities are observing the criminals' activities. 
140. Joel Alexander, (Civil Liberties Protection Officer, U.S. Office of the Director 
of National Intelligence), DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE, 2015, 50-51. It's human nature for such secrecy to fuel suspicion and mistrust. People assume that when someone hides something, it's because he's doing something wrong. This natural suspicion is evident in the concerns about two programs that were recently disclosed: the telephone metadata program conducted under the --business records‖ provision of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act [FISA] (which was amended by Section 215 of the PATRIOT Act [The USA PATRIOT Act, officially titled the Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001] ), and the collection of communications from foreign intelligence targets who are non-U.S. persons located outside the United States, conducted under Section 702 of FISA. The Office of the Director of National Intelligence [ODNI] has published a significant amount of information about both of these programs on its public website, www.dni.gov.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.dni.gov/]
141. Joel Alexander, (Civil Liberties Protection Officer, U.S. Office of the Director 
of National Intelligence), DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE, 2015, 50. Explaining to the public how all of this comes together is important, but is hard to do because it involves sensitive information that adversaries could exploit to avoid detection. By definition, most intelligence work can't be done openly. A fully transparent intelligence service, after all, could not be an effective one. 
142. David Lungren, (U.S. Representative, California), NOTRE DAME JOURNAL 
OF LAW, ETHICS & PUBLIC POLICY, 2012, 437. One of the significant accomplishments of the PATRIOT Act was to tear down the so-called wall between law enforcement and intelligence concerning the sharing of information. In this same regard, there is little reason to deny those in the intelligence community the tools that are available to law enforcement officials. Since 1986, law enforcement has been able to use roving or multipoint wiretaps to investigate ordinary crimes, including drug offenses and racketeering. In fact, even the Ninth Circuit -- known for its liberal jurisprudence -- has upheld roving wiretaps in the criminal context against a Fourth Amendment challenge. Section 206 of the PATRIOT Act simply authorized the same techniques in national security investigations. 
143. David Lungren, (U.S. Representative, California), NOTRE DAME JOURNAL 
OF LAW, ETHICS & PUBLIC POLICY, 2012, 437. When one considers that the aim of those who are plotting terrorist acts is to inflict death on large numbers of innocent people in order to impose further psychological damage on the larger society, there is ample justification for doing so. As Professor Sales put it in his testimony before the House Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, "if a roving wiretap is good enough for Tony Soprano, it is good enough for 
Mohamed Atta." 
144. David Lungren, (U.S. Representative, California), NOTRE DAME JOURNAL 
OF LAW, ETHICS & PUBLIC POLICY, 2012, 441-442. It is important to understand that a section 206 roving or multi-point wiretap must be obtained from the FISA Court. The court itself is comprised of federal judges appointed by the Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court. The 2005 amendments to the PATRIOT Act provided an extra layer of judicial review as additional insurance that intelligence officials will not abuse this multi-point authority. The requirement in the statute of a description of the suspect and the nature and location of each new facility dispel any argument that a roving order is somehow tantamount to a general warrant. 
145. David Lungren, (U.S. Representative, California), NOTRE DAME JOURNAL 
OF LAW, ETHICS & PUBLIC POLICY, 2012, 442. Furthermore, it goes without saying that terrorists use various forms of different communication devices in order to conceal themselves and their communications. Such efforts to avoid detection must not be rewarded by doctrinaire legal theory divorced from the violent world of facts. Section 206 represents a reasonable response to the obligation to protect the public within the parameters of well-settled law. 
146. Thomas Friedman, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, June 12, 2013, A27. I'm glad I 
live in a country with people who are vigilant in defending civil liberties. But as I listen to the debate about the disclosure of two government programs designed to track suspected phone and e-mail contacts of terrorists, I do wonder if some of those who unequivocally defend this disclosure are behaving as if 9/11 never happened - that the only thing we have to fear is government intrusion in our lives, not the intrusion of those who gather in secret cells in Yemen, Afghanistan and Pakistan and plot how to topple our tallest buildings or bring down U.S. airliners with bombs planted inside underwear, tennis shoes or computer printers. Yes, I worry about potential government abuse of privacy from a program designed to prevent another 9/11 - abuse that, so far, does not appear to have happened. But I worry even more about another 9/11. That is, I worry about something that's already happened once - that was staggeringly costly - and that terrorists aspire to repeat. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	37 
 
 
 
147. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. All nations engage in communications interception. Most programs have a domestic focus, but many countries also collect against foreign targets, to the extent of their resources and interests. Most countries approach communications interception as an untrammeled privilege of the sovereign that requires little oversight, knowledge, or consent by the citizens. This has not been part of the surveillance debate, which has sought to portray NSA's behavior as unique. Surveillance is universal and, in many countries, largely ungoverned and certainly not transparent to citizens. There will never be formal international agreement on espionage since no country will stop spying, but it is possible to address the problem indirectly. 
148. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. The relationship between Americans and espionage has always been uncomfortable. In times of great peril, leaders like Washington or Lincoln created secret intelligence services but these were 
temporary and disbanded at conflict's end. Otherwise, the Republic was happy to 
plod along, largely uninformed, and not needing much information given its isolation from great-power conflicts, its self-absorbed role in the world, and a world where geographic distance and primitive technologies combined to eliminate the risk of attack. This happy ignorance ended at 1:49 PM, Eastern Standard Time, on December 7, 1941, with Japan's surprise attack on the U.S. Pacific Fleet. Some would say that the ignorance should have ended earlier, but the period where America could stand apart from the world and not be drawn into its conflicts ended then and will not come back. 
149. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. In one instance, an attack is detected and stopped before it could be executed. U.S. forces operating in Iraq discover a bomb-making factory. Biometric data found in this factory is correlated with data from other bombings to provide partial identification for several individuals who may be bomb-makers, none of whom are present in Iraq. In looking for these individuals, the United States receives information from another intelligence service 
that one of the bombers might be living in a neighboring Middle Eastern country. 
Using communications intercepts, the United States determines that the individual is working on a powerful new weapon. The United States is able to combine the communications intercept from the known bomb maker with information from other sources - battlefield data, information obtained by U.S. agents, collateral information from other nations' intelligence services - and use this to identify others in the bomber's network, understand the plans for bombing, and identify the bomber's target, a major city in the United States. This effort takes place over months and involves multiple intelligence, law enforcement, and military agencies, with more than a dozen individuals from these agencies collaborating to build up a picture of the 
bomb-maker and his planned attack. When the bomb-maker leaves the Middle East to 
carry out his attack, he is prevented from entering the United States. An analogy for how this works would be to take a 1,000-piece jigsaw puzzle, randomly select 200 pieces, and provide them to a team of analysts who, using incomplete data, must 


155. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 92. When considering surveillance directed at national security threats, particularly those of a foreign nature, it is appropriate to --begin the inquiry by noting that the President of the United States has the fundamental duty, under Art. II, s 1, of the Constitution, to ‗preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States,'‖ and that --[i]mplicit in that duty is the power to protect our government against those who would subvert or overthrow it by unlawful means.‖ More broadly, the government's 
interest in protecting national security --is of the highest order of magnitude.‖ 
156. G. Michael Fenner, (Prof., Law, Creighton U. School of Law), MONTANA 
LAWYER, Nov/Dec 2014, 18. There are serious national security concerns at risk here. And a first-job of government is keeping its people safe and secure. We must protect the homeland. Let's go back to our ancient roots for a moment, when we hunted by day and we either lived in caves or envied those who had caves. That is when we learned this: No matter how strong you are, you are vulnerable when you go to sleep. It is just as true today, when we live in grand homes and others live in caves. No matter how strong we are, we are vulnerable when we go to sleep. Someone has to stay alert. 
157. G. Michael Fenner, (Prof., Law, Creighton U. School of Law), MONTANA 
LAWYER, Nov/Dec 2014, 18. There is a pyramid famous in some circles: Maslow's hierarchy of needs. What we as humans need first is food, drink, shelter, and warmth. What we need second is security. All other needs build on that base. Government must prevent the use of force directed against its people. 
158. Peter Swire, (Chair, President's Review Group on Intelligence and 
Communications Technology), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 20. The national security threats facing the United States and our allies are numerous and significant, and they will remain so well into the future. These threats include international terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and cyber espionage and warfare, A robust foreign intelligence collection capability is essential if we are to protect ourselves against such threats. Because our adversaries operate through the use of complex communications technologies, the National Security Agency, with its impressive capabilities and talented officers, is indispensable to keeping our country and our allies safe and secure. 
159. Ronald Sievert, (Prof., Government, U. Texas), NATIONAL SECURITY LAW 
JOURNAL, 2014, 80. There are certainly strong government interests in enforcing city housing and occupational safety codes, as well as stopping illegal immigration. But these cannot compare with the need of the government to protect the nation against a potentially devastating attack perpetrated by a rogue or ambitious nation or, more likely, by a terrorist organization with nothing to lose because it has no home territory to protect. This is an interest --of the highest order of magnitude.‖ As Judge Wilkinson wrote, that the current war is unconventional does not make its consequences any less grave. This is especially true as non-state actors continually seek to obtain WMDs. Such weapons in the hands of committed terrorists pose a potentially existential threat to the nation and, in this context, our need for accurate, timely intelligence cannot be overstated. 
160. Benjamin Wittes, (Fellow in Governance Studies, Brookings Institution), IS AL- 

guess what the entire picture looks like. 
QAEDA 
WINNING? 
GRADING 
THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S 

150. John Yoo, (Prof., Law, U. California at Berkeley Law School), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Summer 2014, 930. Al Qaeda has launched a variety of efforts to attack the United States, and it intends to continue them. The primary way to stop those attacks is to find and stop al Qaeda operatives, and the best way to find them is to intercept their electronic communications. Properly understood, the Constitution does not subject the government to unreasonable burdens in carrying out its highest duty of protecting the nation from attack. 
151. Kenneth Wainstein, (Attorney, Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft, LLP), FISA 
AMENDMENTS ACT OF 2008, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, May 31, 2012, 22. The government has taken a number of steps to enhance our electronic surveillance capacity over the past decade - refining our collection technologies and 
COUNTERTERRORISM POLICY, House Foreign Affairs Committee Hearing, Apr. 
8, 2014, 61. Section 702 is a complicated statute, and it is only one part of a far more complicated, larger statutory arrangement. But broadly speaking, it permits the NSA to acquire without an individualized warrant the communications of non-US persons reasonably believed to be overseas when those communications are transiting the United States or stored in the United States. Under these circumstances, the NSA can order production of such communications from telecommunications carriers and internet companies under broad programmatic orders issued by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court MSC), which reviews both targeting and minimization procedures under which the collection then takes place. Oversight is thick, both within the executive branch, and in reporting requirements to the congressional intelligence committees. 
161. Benjamin Wittes, (Fellow in Governance Studies, Brookings Institution), IS AL- 

devoting more resources and manpower to the effort. But, the one development that 	QAEDA 	WINNING? 	GRADING 	THE 	ADMINISTRATION'S 

has contributed most to that effort was Congress' decision to modernize our national 
security surveillance efforts with the passage of the FISA Amendments Act of 2008. 
152. Rudolph Giuliani (Former Mayor, New York City), ATTACKS ON THE 
HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 9, 2013, 93. In assessing our level of danger from, and our defenses against, terrorism, both President George W. Bush and President Barack Obama have continually warned us that no matter how effective we are, we have to succeed 100% of the time, and the terrorists only have to succeed one time. 
153. Richard Clarke et al. (Chair, President's Review Group on Intelligence and 
Communications Technologies), LIBERTY AND SECURITY IN A CHANGING WORLD, Dec. 12, 2013, 72-73. In the years after the attacks of September 11, a former cabinet member suggested a vivid analogy. He compared --the task of stopping‖ the next terrorist attack --to a goalie in a soccer game who ‗must stop every shot,'‖ for if the enemy --‗scores a single goal,'‖ the terrorists succeed. To make matters worse, --‗the goalie cannot see the ball - it is invisible. So are the players - he doesn't know how many there are, or where they are, or what they look like.'‖ Indeed, the invisible players might shoot the ball --from the front of the goal, or from 
the back, or from some other direction - the goalie just doesn't know.‖ 
154. Jack Goldsmith, (Prof., Law, Harvard Law School), POWER AND 
CONSTRAINT: THE ACCOUNTABLE PRESIDENCY AFTER 9/11, 2012, 248. In this environment, no amount of sophisticated intelligence, modern weaponry, and defensive walls can forever prevent every attack. --The aggressor has to find only one crucial weakness; the defender has to find all of them, and in advance,‖ wrote Herman Kahn in 1960 in his famous book On Thermonuclear War. Under the Kahn principle, some terrorists will succeed. --We aim for perfection, but perfection will not be achieved,‖ says Leiter. 
COUNTERTERRORISM POLICY, House Foreign Affairs Committee Hearing, Apr. 
8, 2014, 61. Make no mistake: Section 702 is a very big deal in America's counterterrorism arsenal. It is far more important than the much debated bulk metadata program, which involves a few hundred queries a year. Section 702 collection, by contrast, is vast, a hugely significant component not only of 
contemporary counterterrorism but of foreign intelligence collection more generally. 
162. Clive Walker, (Prof., Criminal Justice, U. of Leeds), SURVEILLANCE, 
COUNTER-TERRORISM AND COMPARATIVE CONSITUTIONALISM, 2014, 24. This desire to negate endemic terrorist risk through pre-emptive interventions, rather than criminal justice processes, can be more fully explicated through the concept of ‗all-risks' policing. This concept involves recognition of the ‗new and urgent' imperative that terrorism risk must be interdicted at an early stage and adds the acknowledgment that the source of the risk can emanate from anyone, whether ‗neighbour terrorists' living in the back-streets of Leeds or external actors in Afghanistan, Pakistan or Yemen. As a result, counter-terrorism laws have granted extraordinarily wide powers of surveillance, which are bolstered by other holistic responses such as contingency planning and resilience. 
163. John Yoo, (Prof., Law, U. California at Berkeley Law School), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Summer 2014, 908-909. Members of the al Qaeda network can be detected, with good intelligence work or luck, by examining phone and e-mail communications, as well as evidence of joint travel, shared assets, common histories or families, meetings, and so on. As the time for an attack nears, --chatter‖ on this network will increase as operatives communicate to coordinate plans, move and position assets, and conduct reconnaissance of targets. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	38 
 
 
 
164. Robert Mueller, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), OVERSIGHT OF THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, June 19, 2013, 15. In my mind, the communications capabilities of terrorists is the weakest link. If we are to prevent terrorist attacks, we have to know and be in their communications. Having the ability to identify a person in the United States, one telephone number with a telephone that the intelligence community is on in Yemen or Somalia or Pakistan or what have you may prevent that one attack, that Boston or that 9/11. And so, on the one hand, yes, it is relevant evidence; yes, it is critically important that we have that link. And then the question is: When you legislate it and you have this vast volume of records, how do you appropriately give oversight at the Justice Department in the National Security Division, in the Inspector General's office, through the FISA Court, and through Congress. And I think anybody who looks at these programs wants to make sure they are legal, that they are effective, that there is appropriate oversight because it does raise national security and civil liberties concerns. 
165. Keith Alexander, (Dir., NSA), THE SURVEILLANCE TRANSPARENCY 
ACT OF 2013, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, Nov. 13, 2013, 99. NSA's existing 
authorities and programs have helped --connect the dots,‖ working with the broader Intelligence Community and homeland and domestic security organizations, for the good of the nation and its people. NSA's programs have contributed to understanding and disrupting 54 terror related events: 25 in Europe, 11 in Asia, 5 in Africa, and 13 related to the homeland. 
166. Merris Amos, (Prof., Law, U. of London), SURVEILLANCE, COUNTER- 
TERRORISM AND COMPARATIVE CONSITUTIONALISM, 2014, 153-154. It is difficult to call for the abolition of mass surveillance simply on privacy grounds when there is convincing evidence that mass surveillance has, for example, averted enormous loss of life from planned terrorist attacks, led to the apprehension and conviction of a notorious serial child killer or regenerated a previously unsafe area of a city with resulting benefits to businesses and local residents. 
167. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Mason U.), STATE OF FEDERAL 
PRIVACY AND DATA SECURITY LAW: LAGGING BEHIND THE TIMES?, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2012, 108. When David Headley was arrested for allegedly seeking to commit terrorist acts in Denmark, news reports suggested that one of the key factors in his identification was his pattern of travel to the Middle East and his efforts to conceal those trips from the government! Dataveillance of his travel provided both the trigger to ask questions and the factual cross-check on the veracity of his answers. Likewise, when Najibullah Zazi (who tried to explode a bomb in Times Square) was arrested, one factor that was publicly disclosed as a ground for suspicion was his travel to Pakistan! Both of these incidents, which involved serious threats of violence, would appear to have been thwarted, at least in part, through some form of successful dataveillance, i.e., using knowledge discovery techniques to target investigative resources based upon a careful risk assessment of seemingly innocent individuated facts. 
168. Robert Litt, (General Counsel, Office of the Director of National Intelligence), 
IC ON THE RECORD, Mar. 17, 2014. Retrieved Feb. 8, 2015 from 
http://icontherecord.tumblr.com/post/79998577649/as-prepared-for-delivery-remarks- of- 
odni-general. Within the huge mass of information that is generated every day is information that we can use to disrupt terror plots, find foreign spies, detect illicit transfers of nuclear weapons and stop cyber attacks. Big data solutions could help us sort through this information and deal with these challenges - challenges which, for the sake of our nation and our allies, we need to meet head on. 
169. Savage, Charlie, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, June 19, 2013, A18. Top national 
security officials on Tuesday promoted two newly declassified examples of what they portrayed as --potential terrorist events‖ disrupted by government surveillance. The cases were made public as Congress and the Obama administration stepped up a campaign to explain and defend programs unveiled by recent leaks from a former intelligence contractor. One case involved a group of men in San Diego convicted of sending money to an extremist group in Somalia. The other was presented as a nascent plan to bomb the New York Stock Exchange, although its participants were not charged with any such plot. Both were described by Sean Joyce, deputy director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, at a rare public oversight hearing by the House Intelligence Committee. At the same hearing, Gen. Keith B. Alexander, the head of the National Security Agency, said that American surveillance had helped prevent --potential terrorist events over 50 times since 9/11,‖ including at least 10 --homeland-based threats.‖ But he said that a vast majority of the others must remain secret. --In the 12 years since the attacks on Sept. 11, we have lived in relative safety and security as a nation,‖ General Alexander said. --That security is a direct result of the intelligence community's quiet efforts to better connect the dots and learn from 
the mistakes that permitted those attacks to occur on 9/11.‖ 
170. Peter Finn, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, June 28, 2013, A6. German 
Chancellor Angela Merkel said that --tips from American sources‖ had foiled a 2007 plot to attack U.S. troops and citizens in Germany. Four Islamist extremists were convicted of terrorism charges, including planning a massive car bombing near a U.S. Air Force base in Germany. --Our allies have benefited,‖ Alexander said Thursday. 
171. Peter Finn, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, June 28, 2013, A6. Gen. Keith B. 
Alexander, the director of the National Security Agency, provided new details Thursday about the extent to which the government believes its sweeping surveillance powers have led to the disruption of terrorist plots or the arrest of suspects. Speaking at a conference in Baltimore, Alexander said that because of the surveillance programs, 42 terrorist plots were disrupted and 12 individuals were identified as having provided material support to terrorist groups. Of the 54 cases he referred to, Alexander said only 13 had a --homeland nexus‖ and the rest involved cases overseas. Alexander said 25 occurred in Europe, 11 in Asia and five in Africa. Alexander said both the NSA's ability to collect the communications of foreign targets overseas using U.S. Internet firms and the collection of Americans' phone records had contributed separately to counterterrorism efforts. 


172. Stephanie Douglas, (Dir., National Security Branch, FBI), THE ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 12-13. Together with human sources, physical surveillance, and other logical investigation, 215 and 702 play a role in providing us a more full understanding of our risks and gives us an opportunity to proactively address national security threats. I would like to give you just a few examples of where these tools have played a significant role, specifically in counterterrorism investigations. And the first case I want to note is one that is very familiar to this Committee, and that is of Najibullah Zazi. In early September 2009, NSA, using their authorities under 702, intercepted a communication between an al-Qaeda courier located in Pakistan and an unknown U.S. person - U.S.-based person. This U.S.-based person was inquiring about efforts to procure and use explosive materials, and there was some urgency in his communication. NSA advised the FBI as to this communication, as it represented a potential imminent threat to the homeland. Based on the nature of the threat information, the FBI initiated a full investigation and submitted a national security letter to identify the subscriber. The subscriber came back to an individual named Najibullah Zazi located in Denver, Colorado. Additionally, NSA ran a phone number identifiable with Mr. Zazi against the information captured under 215. NSA queried the phone number and identified other Zazi associates. One of those numbers came back to Adis Medunjanin, an Islamic extremist located in Queens, New York. The FBI was already aware of Mr. Medunjanin, but information derived from 215 assisted in defining Zazi's network and provided corroborating information relative to Medunjanin's connection to Zazi. Just a few weeks after the initial tip by NSA, both Zazi and Medunjanin were arrested, along with another co-conspirator. They were 
charged with terrorist acts and a plot to blow up the New York City subway system. 
173. Stephanie Douglas, (Dir., National Security Branch, FBI), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 13. As you already know, the Zazi case was the most serious threat to the homeland since 9/11. The importance of the Zazi case is that it was initiated on information provided by NSA, which they acquired under 702, their coverage of an al-Qaeda operative overseas. Without this tip, we can only speculate as to what may have happened. This was a fast-paced investigation and one in which time was of the essence. The combined tools of 702 and 215 enabled us to not only begin the investigation, but to better understand the possible network involved in an active plot to the homeland. 
174. Abdel Atwan (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 243. As the Internet expands, the possibilities for finding hidden pockets within and outside the worldwide web increase exponentially. Naturally, these so-called dark areas are home to all sorts of illicit activities, including sharing jihadi material and communications. The most obscure area is known as ‗the dark Internet,' where obsolete addresses still exist even though they are no longer accessible by conventional means. These addresses can still be used as routers by skilled hackers, but being outside the Internet's web are completely anonymous. Networks of such addresses, known only to the participants, can be used to form a completely untraceable means of relaying information. 
175. Roland Heickero, (Prof., Swedish National Defense College), THE DARK 
SIDES OF THE INTERNET: ON CYBER THREATS AND INFORMATION WARFARE, 2013, 67. Due to its simplicity, structure and global penetration, the Internet has become one of the most important channels for terrorist organisations like al-Qaeda. The technology makes --networking‖ possible between the organisation's different and loosely tied parts. It is used as a primary tool to collect funding and find new sympathisers and recruits to Jihad. The global network is also used for psychological operations, disinformation and deception campaigns, as well as for blackmail of opponents. The Internet is an effective means of --self- radicalisation‖ of individuals and groups all over the world. 
176. Roland Heickero, (Prof., Swedish National Defense College), THE DARK 
SIDES OF THE INTERNET: ON CYBER THREATS AND INFORMATION WARFARE, 2013, 67-68. According to the Washington-based Institute of Peace, the terrorist network controlled more than 5,000 websites in 2006. At least 50 of these were in turn connected to a number of other forums. Islamism expert Abdel Bari Attwan says there are more than 4,500 sites that help al-Qaeda develop into a truly global ideological movement. Every year hundreds of new sites are added. 
177. Abdel Atwan (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 248. Material available on social networking sites has inspired several ‗lone wolf' attacks in the West. In Britain, Roshanara Choudhry became radicalised after watching Anwar al- Awlaki sermons on YouTube and then tried to stab Stephen Timms MP, citing his support for the Iraq war as her motive. Nicky Reilly, a young man with learning difficulties, became obsessed with the idea of martyrdom after watching videos of 9/11 and suicide attacks on YouTube; he changed his name to Mohamed Abdulaziz Rashid Saeed-Alim and tried to detonate a nail bomb in the Exeter branch of the Giraffe restaurant chain. 
178. Roland Heickero, (Prof., Swedish National Defense College), THE DARK 
SIDES OF THE INTERNET: ON CYBER THREATS AND INFORMATION WARFARE, 2013, 69. There are also a number of fake websites with messages that seem to come from al-Qaeda and the Islamist movement. These are used as --honey- pots‖ in order to monitor possible visitors and catch their IP addresses. Through the IP address it is possible to trace and identify from what server the visitor initiated the session. 
179. James Cole, (Deputy Attorney General of the United States), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 7. The 702 program is different. Under that program, the Government does collect content of communications. Under 702, the Government applies to the FISA court for an order allowing it to collect the communications of non-U.S. persons reasonably believed to be overseas. This order lasts for 1 year. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	39 
 
 
 
180. Kenneth Wainstein, (Attorney, Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft, LLP), FISA AMENDMENTS ACT OF 2008, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, May 31, 2012, 24. The most significant amendment in the FISA Amendments Act is Section 702, which authorizes the FISA Court to approve surveillance of categories of terrorist suspects and other foreign intelligence targets overseas without requiring the government to provide an individualized application as to each particular target. The statute prescribes a new, streamlined process by which categories of overseas targets are approved for surveillance. Under this process, the Attorney General and the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) provide the FISA Court annual certifications identifying the categories of foreign intelligence targets to be subject to this surveillance and certifying that all statutory requirements for that surveillance have been met. 
181. Steven Bradbury, (Attorney & Former Head of the Office of Legal Counsel, 
U.S. Dept. of Justice), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA 
AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 133. The second NSA program revealed by the Snowden leaks - the foreign-targeted surveillance of international communications - is conducted under section 702 of FISA. With court approval, section 702 authorizes a program of foreign-focused surveillance for periods of one year at a time. This authority may only be used if the surveillance does not (1) intentionally target any person, of any nationality, known to be located in the United States, (2) target a person outside the U.S. if the purpose is to reverse target any particular person believed to be in the U.S., (3) intentionally target a U.S. person anywhere in the world, and (4) intentionally acquire any communication as to which the sender and all recipients are known to be in the U.S. 
182. John Yoo, (Prof., Law, U. California at Berkeley Law School), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Summer 2014, 914. Depending on network efficiencies, the electronic communications of two people - even if they are in adjacent towns - might traverse any country where network backbones are located, such as the United States. Section 702 simply recognizes that a different set of surveillance authorities should not be triggered simply because part of a message between non-U.S. persons passes through the United States. For example, if a suspected terrorist in Pakistan were to send an e-mail to an address of a person believed to be located in Afghanistan, the NSA could intercept the e-mail even if part or all of the message itself moved through communication networks located in the United States. 
183. James Clapper, (U.S. Director of National Intelligence), FISA AMENDMENTS 
ACT OF 2008, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, May 31, 2012, 7. Section 702 is vital in keeping the nation safe. It provides information about the plans and identities of terrorists, allowing us to glimpse inside terrorist organizations and obtain information about how those groups function and receive support. In addition, it lets us collect information about the intentions and capabilities of weapons proliferators and other foreign adversaries who threaten the United States. Failure to reauthorize section 702 would result in a loss of significant intelligence and impede the ability of the Intelligence Community to respond quickly to new threats and intelligence opportunities. Although this unclassified paper cannot discuss more specifically the nature of the information acquired under section 702 or its significance, the Intelligence Community is prepared to provide Members of Congress with detailed classified briefings as appropriate. 
184. Peter Finn, (Staff), THE WASHINGTON POST, June 19, 2013, A1. "The 702 
program has been enormously useful in a large number of terrorist cases," said a U.S. 
official who has access to classified records on NSA programs. "It's basically beyond dispute that it is highly effective. It operates exactly as anyone paying attention would have expected it to operate based on floor debate and plain reading of law." Passage of Section 702 as an amendment to FISA in 2008 gave the government the authority to request information from U.S. telecommunications companies on foreign targets located overseas without a court order for each individual case. The broad authority is reviewed and renewed annually by the FISA court, although the law does not preclude making a specific request for surveillance. 
185. John Inglis, (Deputy U.S. Attorney General), THE ADMINISTRATION'S USE 
OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 11. The second program, which we operate under Section 702 of the FISA - the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act - authorizes the collection of communications for the purpose of foreign intelligence with the compelled assistance of electronic communications service providers, sometimes called telecommunications providers. Under this authority, NSA can collect communications for foreign intelligence purposes only when the person who is the target of our collection is a foreigner who is at that moment outside the United States. As you have heard earlier, we cannot use this authority to intentionally target any U.S. citizen or other U.S. person, any person known to be in the United States, a person outside the United States if our purpose in targeting that person is to acquire information from a person inside the United States. This program has been key to our counterterrorism efforts. More than 90 percent of information to support the 50 disruptions that you will hear my colleague from the FBI briefly describe came from Section 702 authorities. 
186. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 93. As discussed elsewhere in this Report, the Board believes that the Section 702 program significantly aids the government's efforts to prevent terrorism, as well as to combat weapons proliferation and gather foreign intelligence for other purposes. 
187. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 103. In the Board's assessment, the Section 702 program has proven valuable in enabling the government to prevent acts of terrorism within the United States and abroad, and to pursue other foreign intelligence goals. The program has helped the government to learn about the membership and activities of terrorist organizations, as well as to 
discover previously unknown terrorist operatives and disrupt specific terrorist plots. 


188. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 104. The Section 702 program makes a substantial contribution to the government's efforts to learn about the membership, goals, and activities of international terrorist organizations, and to prevent acts of terrorism from coming to fruition. Section 702 allows the government to acquire a greater range of foreign intelligence than it otherwise would be able to obtain, and it provides a degree of flexibility not offered by comparable surveillance authorities. 
189. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 107. The Section 702 program has proven valuable in a number of ways to the government's efforts to combat terrorism. It has helped the United States learn more about the membership, leadership structure, priorities, tactics, and plans of international terrorist organizations. It has enabled the discovery of previously unknown terrorist operatives as well as the locations and movements of suspects already known to the government. It has led to the discovery of previously unknown terrorist plots directed 
against the United States and foreign countries, enabling the disruption of those plots. 
190. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 108. Presently, over a quarter of the NSA's reports concerning international terrorism include information based in whole or in part on Section 702 collection, and this percentage has increased every year since the statute was enacted. These reports are used by the recipient agencies and departments for a variety of purposes, including to inform senior leaders in government and for operational planning. More concretely, information acquired from Section 702 has helped the Intelligence Community to understand the structure and hierarchy of international terrorist networks, as well as their intentions and tactics. In even the most well-known terrorist organizations, only a small number of individuals have a public presence. Terrorist groups use a number of practices to obscure their membership and activities. Section 702 has enabled the U.S. government to monitor these terrorist networks in order to learn how they operate and to understand how their priorities, strategies, and tactics continue to evolve. 
191. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 108. Monitoring these networks under Section 702 has led the government to identify previously unknown individuals who are involved in international terrorism. Identifying such persons allows the government to pursue new efforts focusing on those individuals and the disruption of their activities, such as taking action to prevent them from entering the United States. Finally, the flexibility of Section 702 surveillance enables the government to effectively maintain coverage on particular individuals as they add or switch their modes of communications. 
192. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 108. As important as discovering the identities of individuals engaged in international terrorism is determining where those individuals are located. Modern communications permit the members of a terrorist group, and even a small number of people involved in a specific plot, to be spread out all over the world. Information acquired from Section 702 has been used to monitor individuals believed to be engaged in terrorism. 
193. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 108. In one case, for example, the NSA was conducting surveillance under Section 702 of an email address used by an extremist based in Yemen. Through that surveillance, the agency discovered a connection between that extremist and an unknown person in Kansas City, Missouri. The NSA passed this information to the FBI, which identified the unknown person, Khalid Ouazzani, and subsequently discovered that he had connections to U.S.-based Al Qaeda associates, who had previously been part of an abandoned early stage plot to bomb the New York Stock Exchange. All of these individuals eventually pled guilty to providing and attempting to provide material support to Al Qaeda. 
194. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 108-109. Finally, pursuit of the foregoing information under Section 702 has led to the discovery of previously unknown terrorist plots and has enabled the government to disrupt them. By providing the sites of specific targets of attacks, the means being contemplated to carry out the attacks, and the identities and locations of the participants, the Section 702 program has directly enabled the thwarting of specific terrorist attacks, aimed at the United States and at other countries. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	40 
 
 
 
195. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 109. For instance, in September 2009, the NSA monitored under Section 702 the email address of an Al Qaeda courier based in Pakistan. Through that collection, the agency intercepted emails sent to that address from an unknown individual located in the United States. Despite using language designed to mask their true intent, the messages indicated that the sender was urgently seeking advice on the correct mixture of ingredients to use for making explosives. The NSA passed this information to the FBI, which used a national security letter to identify the unknown individual as Najibullah Zazi, located near Denver, Colorado. The FBI then began intense monitoring of Zazi, including physical surveillance and obtaining legal authority to monitor his Internet activity. The Bureau was able to track Zazi as he left Colorado a few days later to drive to New York City, where he and a group of confederates were planning to detonate explosives on subway lines in Manhattan within the week. Once Zazi became aware that law enforcement was tracking him, he returned to Colorado, where he was arrested soon after. Further investigative work identified Zazi's co- conspirators and located bomb-making components related to the planned attack. Zazi and one of his confederates later pled guilty and cooperated with the government, while another confederate was convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment. Without the initial tip-off about Zazi and his plans, which came about by monitoring an overseas foreigner under Section 702, the subway-bombing plot might have succeeded. 
196. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 109. The Board has received information about other instances in which the Section 702 program has played a role in counterterrorism efforts. Most of these instances are included in a compilation of 54 --success stories‖ involving the Section 215 and 702 programs that was prepared by the Intelligence Community last year in the wake of Edward Snowden's unauthorized disclosures. Other examples have been shared with the Board more recently. Information about these cases has not been declassified, but some general information about them can be shared. In approximately twenty cases that we have reviewed, surveillance conducted under Section 702 was used in support of an already existing counterterrorism investigation, while in approximately thirty cases, Section 702 information was the initial catalyst that identified previously unknown terrorist operatives and/or plots. 
197. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 110. In the vast majority of these cases, efforts undertaken with the support of Section 702 appear to have begun with narrowly focused surveillance of a specific individual whom the government had a reasonable basis to believe was involved with terrorist activities, leading to the discovery of a specific plot, after which a short, intensive period of further investigation ensued, leading to the identification of confederates and arrests of the plotters. A rough count of these cases identifies well over one hundred arrests on terrorism-related offenses. In other cases that did not lead to disruption of a plot or apprehension of conspirators, Section 702 appears to have been used to provide warnings about a continuing threat or to assist in investigations that remain ongoing. 
198. John Inglis, (Dir., National Security Agency), STRENGTHENING PRIVACY 


200. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 9-10. The Section 702 program has enabled the government to acquire a greater range of foreign intelligence than it otherwise would have been able to obtain - and to do so quickly and effectively. Compared with the --traditional‖ FISA process under Title I of the statute, Section 702 imposes significantly fewer limits on the government when it targets foreigners located abroad, permitting greater flexibility and a dramatic increase in the number of people who can realistically be targeted. The program has proven valuable in the government's efforts to combat terrorism as well as in other areas of foreign intelligence. Presently, over a quarter of the NSA's reports concerning international terrorism include information based in whole or in part on Section 702 collection, and this percentage has increased every year since the statute was enacted. Monitoring terrorist networks under Section 702 has enabled the government to learn how they operate, and to understand their priorities, strategies, and tactics. In addition, the program has led the government to identify previously unknown individuals who are involved in international terrorism, and it has played a key role in discovering and disrupting specific terrorist plots aimed at the United States and other countries. 
201. John Camara, (Former Special Agent, U.S. Department of the Treasury), 
TERRORIST FINANCING SINCE 9/11: ASSESSING AN EVOLVING AL- QAEDA AND STATE SPONSORS OF TERRORISM, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 18, 2012, 13. Predictive analytics use elements involved in a successful case or investigation and overlays these elements on other data sets to detect previously unknown behaviors or activities, enhancing and expanding an investigator's knowledge, efforts, productivities while more effectively deploying resources. Social network analytics helps investigators detect and prevent criminal activity by going beyond individual transactions to analyze all related activities in various mediums and networks uncovering previously unknown relationships. Visual analytics is a high-performance, in-memory solution for exploring massive amounts of data very quickly. It enables users to spot patterns, identify opportunities for further analysis, and convey visual results via web reports or the iPad. Moreover, it is now possible to engineer --red flag indicators‖ in financial reports - both within the Government and in commercial enterprises that file the information - that will identify likely suspect methodologies such a hawala or trade-based money laundering. 
202. John Camara, (Former Special Agent, U.S. Department of the Treasury), 
TERRORIST FINANCING SINCE 9/11: ASSESSING AN EVOLVING AL- QAEDA AND STATE SPONSORS OF TERRORISM, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 18, 2012, 12-13. Concurrently, there have been major advances in data mining and advanced analytical capabilities that can help organizations derive the --intelligence‖ from this vast amount of data. Data warehousing and retrieval are enhanced by cutting-edge technologies that search, mine, analyze, link, and detect anomalies, suspicious behaviors, and related or interconnected activities and people. Fraud frameworks can be deployed to help concerned Government agencies and departments detect suspicious activity using scoring engines that can both rate, with high degrees of statistical accuracy, behaviors that warrant further investigation while generating alerts when something of importance changes. 
203. Bruce Hoffman, (Dir., Center for Peace and Security Studies, Georgetown U.), 
ATTACKS ON THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 9, 2013, 102. Although one cannot deny the vast inroads made against Core al- 

RIGHTS AND NATIONAL SECURITY: 	OVERSIGHT OF FISA 	Qaeda in recent years, the long-established nucleus of the al-Qaeda organization has 

SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2013, 
54-55. I'll start with Section 702 of the FISA, which authorizes the targeting of non- U.S. persons abroad for foreign intelligence purposes such as counter-terrorism and counter-proliferation. Specifically, Section 702 authorizes the collection of communications for the purpose of Foreign Intelligence with the compelled assistance of an electronic communication service provider. Under this authority NSA can collect communications for foreign intelligence purposes only when the person who is the target of our collection is a foreigner who is reasonably believed to be outside the US. Section 702 cannot be used to intentionally target: any US citizen or other US person, any person known to be in the US, or a person outside the United States if the purpose is to target a person inside the United States This program is also key to our counterterrorism efforts; information used in greater than 90% of the 54 disrupted terrorism events we have previously cited in public testimony was gained from section 702 authorities. 
199. John Inglis, (Dir., National Security Agency), STRENGTHENING PRIVACY 
proven itself to be as resilient as it is formidable. For more than a decade, it has withstood arguably the greatest international onslaught directed against a terrorist organization in history. Further, it has consistently shown itself capable of adapting and adjusting to even the most consequential countermeasures directed against it, having, despite all odds, survived for a quarter century. 
204. Bruce Hoffman, (Dir., Center for Peace and Security Studies, Georgetown U.), 
ATTACKS ON THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 9, 2013, 102. In this respect, the --Arab Spring,‖ and especially the on-going unrest and protracted civil war in Syria, have endowed the al-Qaeda brand and, by extension, the core organization, with new relevance and status that, depending on the future course of events in both that country and the surrounding region, could potentially resuscitate Core al-Qaeda's waning fortunes. The fact that the al-Qaeda Core seems to enjoy an unmolested existence from authorities in Pakistan, coupled with the forthcoming withdrawal of U.S. forces and ISAF troops from Afghanistan, further suggests that Core al-Qaeda may well regain the breathing space and cross- 

RIGHTS AND NATIONAL SECURITY: 	OVERSIGHT OF FISA 	border physical sanctuary needed to ensure its continued longevity. 

SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2013, 
55. As one example, we've discussed the case of Najibullah Zazi. NSA analysts, leveraging section 702 to target the email of a Pakistan-based al-Qaida terrorist, discovered that he was communicating with someone about a plot involving explosives. NSA tipped this exchange to the FBI who confirmed that the communicant was actually Denver-based Zazi, who we know now was planning an imminent attack on the New York subway system. Without the tip from FAA 702, the plot may never have been uncovered. 
205. Bruce Hoffman, (Dir., Center for Peace and Security Studies, Georgetown U.), 
ATTACKS ON THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 9, 2013, 102. Hence, while bin Laden's death inflicted a crushing blow on al- Qaeda, it is still not clear that it has necessarily been a fatal one. He left behind a resilient movement that, though seriously weakened, has nonetheless been expanding and consolidating its control in new and far-flung locales. Today, al-Qaeda is arguably situated in more places than it was on September 11, 2001. It maintains a presence in some 14 different theatres of operation - compared to half as many as recently as 5 years ago. 
206. Bruce Hoffman, (Dir., Center for Peace and Security Studies, Georgetown U.), 
ATTACKS ON THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 9, 2013, 104. Second, the conflict in Syria - and the attendant opportunities it presents to alQaeda at a critical time in its history - has potentially breathed new life into the al-Qaeda brand and movement, exactly as Iraq did after 2003. Because of its effective intervention in Syria, al-Qaeda's prospects are today brighter than arguably at any other time in the past decade. 
207. Ted Poe, (U.S. Representative, Texas), IS AL-QAEDA WINNING? GRADING 
THE ADMINISTRATION'S COUNTERTERRORISM POLICY, House Foreign Affairs Committee Hearing, Apr. 8, 2014, 2. Al-Qaeda and their affiliates are devastating Iraq. We have seen more deaths in Iraq over the last year than the worst year when our troops were there. Al-Qaeda is all over Somalia. This branch crossed over into Kenya to launch a spectacular attack. It killed over 60 people who were just shopping at a mall. Al-Qaeda is resurgent in Libya. The government can't go into the eastern half of its own country because it is controlled by terrorists. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	41 
 
 
 
208. Robert Mueller, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), HOMELAND THREATS AND AGENCY RESPONSES, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee Hearing, Sept. 19, 2012, 75. Our experience has been that several key al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) figures were born or educated in the United States; they understand our culture and our security protocols, and they use this understanding to develop and refine new tactics and techniques for their proposed attacks. Al Qaeda affiliates and surrogates, especially AQAP, represent the top counterterrorism threat to the nation. These groups have attempted several attacks on the United States, including the failed Christmas Day airline bombing in 2009, and the attempted bombing of U.S.-bound cargo planes in October of 2010. 
209. Frederick Kagan, (Dir., Critical Threats Project, American Institute for Public 


218. Clark Ervin, (Partner, Patton Boggs, LLP), A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON THREATS TO THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Feb. 13, 2013, 33. And, if anything, the terror threat today is more complicated than it was a decade ago because the threat is more diffuse, with --al-Qaeda Core‖ having metastasized, cancer-like, into various virulent regional cells throughout most of the world. And, we face today's terrorism threat in a severely constrained fiscal environment, with huge defense cuts looming like a proverbial Sword of Damocles, limiting policymakers' and war fighters' options to a degree unprecedented in recent history. 
219. William Braniff, (Dir., National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism), 
Howard McKeon, (Chair, House Comm. on Armed Services), THE STATE OF AL- QAEDA, ITS AFFILIATES, AND ASSOCIATED GROUPS: VIEW FROM 

Policy 	Research), 	IS 	AL-QAEDA 	WINNING? 	GRADING 	THE 	OUTSIDE EXPERTS, House Armed Services Comm. Hearing, Feb. 4, 2014, 66. In 

ADMINISTRATION'S COUNTERTERRORISM POLICY, House Foreign Affairs 
Committee Hearing, Apr. 8, 2014, 47. Disorder and conflict in the Muslim world breed support for al Qaeda, which is starting to look like the strong horse in Iraq and even in Syria. Al Qaeda groups and their allies, on the other hand, powerfully contribute to the collapse of state structures and the emergence of horrific violence and Hobbesian chaos wherever they operate. 
210. Candice Miller, (U.S. Representative, Michigan), ELEVEN YEARS LATER: 
PREVENTING TERRORISTS FROM COMING TO AMERICA, House Homeland 
2012, the most recent year for which START has provided a complete set of global terrorism data to the Department of State for its Congressionally-mandated Country Reports on Terrorism, more than 6,800 terrorist attacks killed more than 11,000 people. Even if you compare these more conservative 2012 figures provided to the Department of State against the more inclusive Global Terrorism Database (GTD) statistics dating back to 1970, the previous record for number of attacks was set in 2011 with more than 5,000 incidents. This makes 2012 the most active year of terrorism on record. 

Security Comm. Hearing, Sept. 11, 2012, 4. Contrary to what some have suggested, 	220. 	Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 

al-Qaeda, although diminished in capability, is still a lethal enemy, intent on 
attacking the homeland. Vigilance is one of the best tools at our disposal to prevent terror travel. 
211. Richard Daddario, (Deputy Commissioner for Counterterrorism, New York City 
Police Department), COUNTERTERRORISM EFFORTS TO COMBAT A CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL, RADIOLOGICAL, AND NUCLEAR (CBRN) ATTACK ON THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Apr. 25, 2013, 10. Not so long ago we heard that al-Qaeda was close to defeat. Now we see it has an expansive space in which to operate, recruit, train, and plan in areas with weak governments and states where its ideology has significant public and political support. That ideology advocates attacks against the United States in the homeland. Iran appears to be intent on creating all the components it needs to assemble and deliver nuclear bombs. If it goes ahead and does that - and there is no reason to think it will not have that capability soon - it will be very difficult to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapon technology in the Middle East. 
212. William Braniff, (Dir., National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism), 
Howard McKeon, (Chair, House Comm. on Armed Services), THE STATE OF AL- QAEDA, ITS AFFILIATES, AND ASSOCIATED GROUPS: VIEW FROM OUTSIDE EXPERTS, House Armed Services Comm. Hearing, Feb. 4, 2014, 67. Based on preliminary terrorism incident data for January through June of 2013, and again using the Department of State's inclusion standards, the eight most lethal organizations in that time-period include the Taliban, al-Qa'ida in Iraq, Tehrik-i- Taliban Pakistan, Boko Haram, Lashkar-e-Jhangvi, al-Nusrah Front, al-Shabaab, and al-Mua'qi'oon Biddam Brigade. These preliminary data reinforce the hypothesis that 
groups generally associated with alQa'ida remain the most lethal groups in the world. 
213. Joseph Lieberman, (Former U.S. Senator, Connecticut), A FALSE 
NARRATIVE ENDANGERS THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Jan. 15, 2014, 8. Yet now it is al-Qaeda that is surging back in Iraq, hoisting its black flag over cities like Fallujah and Ramadi, murdering hundreds of innocent Iraqis this year, with violence surging back to 2008 levels. This leads to an important conclusion. While space for core al-Qaeda in tribal Pakistan has been shrunk thanks to persistent U.S. action in recent years, new territory where al-Qaeda affiliates can find sanctuary has grown significantly during this same period, in the Middle East, North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa. 
214. Robert Mueller, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), HOMELAND 
THREATS AND AGENCY RESPONSES, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee Hearing, Sept. 19, 2012, 75. AQAP leaders have published English-language articles in the Internet detailing their intent to strike the United States. They are also making use of social media to share their knowledge with individuals of similar mindsets. They realize the value of reaching English- speaking audiences, and are using the group's marketing skills to inspire individuals to undertake attacks in the United States, without having to travel or train abroad. 
215. Joseph Pfeifer, (Chief of Counterterrorism, Fire Department of New York City), 
PROTECTING THE HOMELAND AGAINST MUMBAI-STYLE ATTACKS AND THE THREAT FROM LASHKAR-E-TAIBA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearings, June 12, 2013, 11. Recently, we witnessed two men at the Boston Marathon kill three people, injure 275 others and paralyze the city. The Boston attacks serve as an important reminder that attacks need not be sophisticated to be deadly. Indeed, a survey of al-Qaeda-inspired attack plots in the United States over the past decade reveals a trend remarkable for the simplicity of attack plans. 
216. Michael McCaul, (Chair, House Committee on Homeland Security), ATTACKS 
ON THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 9, 2013, 2. We now know that DHS was alerted to his trip overseas, but nothing was done. In other words, he was on our radar screen, and then he was off. What remains unanswered is whether this information was shared between Federal agencies and State and local officials. Almost 9 months after Tamerlan returned, he and his brother, Dzhokhar executed the largest terrorist attack on our soil since 9/11. This demonstrates that the radical jihad movement is alive and well around the world and in the homelands. We learned over a decade ago the danger in failing to connect the dots. 
217. Michael McCaul, (Chair, House Committee on Homeland Security), A FALSE 
NARRATIVE ENDANGERS THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Jan. 15, 2014, 2. Terrorist groups are multiplying. They are spreading like wildfire, I would submit, like a spider web across Northern Africa. Foreign fighters are pouring in every day into Syria at an alarming rate, while Syria itself is being pulled apart by Saudi Arabia and Iran. 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 1. Our world faces many threats, including but not limited to a deteriorating environment, killer diseases, poverty, illiteracy, and energy shortages. It is the threat posed by radical terrorists, however, that is perhaps the most dangerous and severe. Using conventional and unconventional weapons, these extremists are intent on spreading global jihad across the globe as retaliation for their perceived humiliation. The resurgence of radical Islamic movements driven by fundamentalists and holy militants, with their access to wealth and technology and support spanning the world, has led to a global network of terror. Underestimating or yielding to these extremists will result in formidable risks. 
221. Abdel Atwan (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 19. In September 2010, Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) claimed responsibility for the explosion on board a UPS cargo plane in Dubai - which downed the plane and killed two - saying it was a ‗test run.' Two months later explosives hidden in printer ink cartridges were sent from Yemen to be shipped by UPS planes; one package, addressed to a Chicago synagogue, was discovered in Dubai while the other was defused in Britain with just seventeen minutes left to go before it detonated. Forensic experts believe that these attacks were also designed by Ibrahim Hassan al-Asiri and that he remains the single most potent threat to the US. 
222. Abdel Atwan (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 32. Despite the more than a trillion dollars which have been spent on the ‗war on terror', Al Qaeda is not only still here, but is expanding its reach and influence. 
223. Abdel Atwan (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 37. The deaths of bin Laden and other key leaders, such as Anwar al-Awlaki, have not destroyed Al Qaeda as some commentators have suggested. Instead, the organisation has expanded its reach by cementing new alliances and exploiting the opportunities regional turmoil affords. It has also fundamentally changed in nature, becoming an ideology and a network of associated local movements with a shared global agenda. 
224. Abdel Atwan (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 257. The death of Osama bin Laden coupled with the Arab Spring provoked a number of articles, and even books, proclaiming that Al Qaeda was obsolete and defeated. Those optimistic voices have fallen silent as the terror group and its allies return to the headlines, seemingly able to fight on several fronts at once and launch serial ‗spectaculars' whilst posing a continual threat to the West. 
225. Abdel Atwan (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 264. It is impossible to estimate how many jihadis there are in numerous camps and bases around the world but it is sobering to reflect that, as long ago as 2005, Western leaders were claiming they had killed 5,000-6,000 Al Qaeda-related fighters and two-thirds of the leadership. Given that the elimination of fighters and leaders has continued apace, and yet the organisation continues to launch attacks around the globe, we may be seriously underestimating its size. 
226. Abdel Atwan, (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 267. Despite trillions of dollars spent on the ‗war on terror,' the killing of Osama bin Laden and many other leaders, and the relentless pounding of AQAM strongholds and camps by shells, bombs and drones, Al Qaeda remains deeply entrenched around the globe. AQAM is an unprecedented phenomenon: a terror organisation with the clout - and many of the resources - of a state actor. It has armies and weapons, it has the apparatus of government and its own judicial system, it has funding and fiscal policies. In territorial terms it has yet to dominate an entire country, but has emirates in many locations, as we have seen above, including the two-thirds of Afghanistan under Taliban control, much of southern and central Yemen and most of the Sahel. 
227. C. Michael Hurley, (Staff Member, 9/11 Commission), 9/11, TEN YEARS 
LATER, 2012, 141. The terrorists will not give up even though they have been badly 
hurt. We have had our successes but we cannot let our guard down. That would be a huge mistake. We will see new attempts and successful attacks. We are safer than ten years ago, and we have hit the enemy hard, but we must continue, regularly, to 
reassess and recalibrate our strategies. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	42 
 
 
 
228. Dan Friedman, (Staff), NEW YORK DAILY NEWS, Sept. 24, 2014, 4. The jihadists were believed to be in the advanced stage with plots against the U.S., according to CNN. Intelligence officials believed the extremists were developing hard-to-detect explosives that would be masked as hand-held electronics or airplane carry-on items, CNN said. An intelligence source told the network that plots against the U.S. had been discovered within the past week, and the schemes involved a bomb with a nonmetallic detonator, toothpaste and clothes dipped in explosives and even bombs disguised as toothpaste, the network said. 
229. Michael McCaul, (Chair, House Committee on Homeland Security), A FALSE 
NARRATIVE ENDANGERS THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Jan. 15, 2014, 2. Over time the term --al-Qaeda‖ has come to symbolize an ideology of hate towards the West, with the goal of establishment of a Caliphate ruled by Sharia law and the pathway there through violent jihad. We are seeing it spread, play out in the Middle East, in Africa, and in the Caucasus. And although many terrorist groups subscribe to this ideology, we must understand that they are independent organizations planning and conducting operations without the oversight of an al-Qaeda central command. 
230. Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 64. Suicide bombers are capable of killing thousands in an instant, to achieve strategic goals and gain more concessions. Three recent incidents of radical Islamic terror - the Fort Hood massacre, the Christmas Day 2009 airline bombing attempt, and the Times Square bomb plot - indicate that there has been no diminution of terrorism. Denying the existence of radical Islam will not make it go away. 
231. James Comey, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), THREATS TO THE 
HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 60. Al-Qa'ida and its affiliates continue to encourage extremists in the West to follow this model by engaging in individual violent attacks and have already incorporated the Boston bombings in their propaganda. 
232. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 181. For every plot uncovered or bomb discovered, there have been a far greater number of terrorists who have succeeded in carrying out their attacks. The task for those dedicated to fighting terrorism is quite daunting. Terrorists can strike anywhere, anytime, while it is impossible to protect every target, everywhere. That is why there can never realistically be an end to terrorism. There will always be vulnerable targets somewhere for a group, cell, or individual with varying motivations to exploit in a terrorist operation. 
233. Abdel Atwan (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 13. Osama bin Laden is dead, but the movement he co-founded more than two decades ago is stronger and more widespread than ever, with a presence across much of the Middle East, parts of Africa and Asia and even in Europe and North America. 
234. Sylvia Longmire, (Former U.S. Air Force Officer & Intelligence Analyst), 
BORDER INSECURITY: WHY BIG MONEY, FENCES, AND DRONES AREN'T MAKING US SAFER, 2014, 6. Virtually everyone in America agrees that terrorism is a major threat to our national security, and as a result, counterterrorism policies and strategies are top priorities for the current administration. Politicians may vary in their opinions about how to achieve the best strategy - clearly displayed in debates over the Patriot Act and interrogation methods - but they all agree we need to prevent terrorists from killing Americans at home and abroad. 
235. Joel Rosenberg, (Journalist), IMPLOSION: CAN AMERICA RECOVER 
FROM ITS ECONOMIC AND SPIRITUAL CHALLENGES IN TIME?, 2012, 158. The events of September 11, 2001, taught us the hard way that terrorism - especially from radical Islamic jihadists such as al Qaeda and the Taliban, but also from the Muslim Brotherhood, Hezbollah, Hamas, and other non-state actors - represents a clear and present danger to the United States. Unfortunately, even after a decade of hot war with the jihadists, this is still true. 
236. Frederick Kagan, (Dir., Critical Threats Project, American Institute for Public 


238. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. A simple assessment of the risk of attack by jihadis would take into account a resurgent Taliban, the power of lslamist groups in North Africa, the continued existence of Shabaab in Somalia, and the appearance of a powerful new force, the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS). Al Qaeda, previously the leading threat, has splintered into independent groups that make it a less coordinated force but more difficult target. On the positive side, the United States, working with allies and friends, appears to have contained or eliminated jihadi groups in Southeast Asia. Many of these groups seek to use adherents in Europe and the United States for manpower and funding. A Florida teenager was a suicide bomber in Syria and Al Shabaab has in the past drawn upon the Somali population in the United States. Hamas and Hezbollah have achieved 
quasi-statehood status, and Hamas has supporters in the United States. Iran, which 
supports the two groups, has advanced capabilities to launch attacks and routinely attacked U.S. forces in Iraq. 
239. Jonathan White, (Prof. & Dir., Homeland Security Project, Grand Valley State 
U.), TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY, 2014, 590. September 11, 2001, was horrible by any measure. If the Proteus study is correct, something of the same magnitude will happen again. Clearly, this means that the nation must be prepared and take measures to prevent an attack before it happens. 
240. Michael McCaul, (Chair, House Committee on Homeland Security), ATTACKS 
ON THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 9, 2013, 2. Equally concerning is the emerging narrative which downplays the spread of the global jihadist movement. From the attack at Fort Hood to the tragedy at Benghazi, the Boston bombings are our most recent reminder that we must call terrorism really for what it is in order to confront it. You cannot defeat an enemy you refuse to acknowledge. 
241. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. The chairman of the House Select Committee on Intelligence, who is better placed than most members of Congress to assess risk, said in June 2014 that the level of terrorist activity was higher 
than he had ever seen it. If the United States overreacted in response to September 11, 
it now risks overreacting to the [Snowden] leaks with potentially fatal consequences. 
242. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. The echoes of September 11 have faded and the fear of attack has diminished. We are reluctant to accept terrorism as a facet of our daily lives, but major attacks - roughly one a year in the last five years - are regularly planned against U.S. targets, particularly passenger aircraft and cities. America's failures in the Middle East have spawned new, aggressive terrorist groups. These groups include radicalized recruits from the West - one estimate puts the number at over 3,000 - who will return home embittered and hardened by combat. Particularly in Europe, the next few years will see an influx of jihadis joining the existing population of homegrown radicals, but the United States itself remains a target. 
243. Richard Haas, (Pres., Council on Foreign Relations), FOREIGN POLICY 
BEGINS AT HOME: THE CASE FOR PUTTING AMERICA'S HOUSE IN ORDER, 2013, 24. Terrorism is another manifestation of the reality that military advantage does not translate into obvious security. The United States is a relatively open society, and with such openness comes vulnerability. This is one lesson of 9/11. Intelligence and law enforcement capabilities in this realm tend to be more relevant than military might; US defense forces play a secondary role at most. The fact that al- Qaeda was incomparably weaker than the United States was unrelated to its ability to inflict great harm on the cheap. 
244. Richard Haas, (Pres., Council on Foreign Relations), FOREIGN POLICY 
BEGINS AT HOME: THE CASE FOR PUTTING AMERICA'S HOUSE IN ORDER, 2013, 95. Counterterrorism, a third possible foreign policy doctrine, 

Policy 	Research), 	IS 	AL-QAEDA 	WINNING? 	GRADING 	THE 	understandably gained currency in the aftermath of 9/11. Why it is an element of US 

ADMINISTRATION'S COUNTERTERRORISM POLICY, House Foreign Affairs 
Committee Hearing, Apr. 8, 2014, 47. Conditions are also set for state collapse in Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Yemen, and possibly Jordan. Saudi Arabia, facing a complex succession soon, is likely to acquire nuclear weapons shortly, if it has not already done so. Turkey and Egypt confront major crises. Almost all of Northern and 
Equatorial Africa is violent, unstable, and facing a growing al Qaeda threat. 
237. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 92-93. Furthermore, the hostile activities of terrorist organizations and other foreign entities are prone to being geographically dispersed, long-term in their planning, conducted in foreign languages or in code, and coordinated in large part from locations outside the reach of the United States. Accordingly, --complex, wide-ranging, and decentralized organizations, such as al Qaeda, warrant sustained and intense monitoring in order to 
understand their features and identify their members.‖ 
national security policy is self-evident. Terrorists constitute a threat to American interests worldwide as well as to the homeland; this country's servicemen, diplomats, businessmen, and tourists are all vulnerable. So, too, are governments that work with the United States and societies that share many of its values. Terrorism can be an effective tool of the weak; as we saw on 9/11, a relatively small investment can have an enormous payoff in what it can destroy. Open societies such as the United States are especially vulnerable. 
245. Stephanie Kostro, (Sr. Fellow, Center for Strategic and International Studies), 
FROM AL-SHABAAB TO AL-NUSRA: HOW WESTERNERS JOINING TERROR GROUPS OVERSEAS AFFECT THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Oct. 9, 2013, 37. As with al-Shabaab, al-Nusra appears to be using foreign fighters for propaganda. In addition, foreigners may be acquiring skills in combat, bomb-making, and counterintelligence. Al-Nusra, in general, has proven capabilities in assassinations, suicide attacks, and improvised explosive devices, to include car bombs. 
246. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE 

                       DEBATE, 	Dec. 	2014. 	Retrieved 	Jan. 	15, 	2015 	from 
                       http://csis.org/files/publication/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf.  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publication/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf]
                       Western targets still remain of interest, but are more likely to face attacks from domestic sympathizers. This could change if the well-resourced ISIS is frustrated in its efforts to establish a new Caliphate and turns its focus to the West. In addition, the 
                       al Qaeda affiliate in Yemen (al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula) continues to 
                       regularly plan attacks against U.S. targets. 
                       
 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	43 
 
 
 
247. Matthew Olsen, (Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), THREATS TO THE HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 65. Here in the United States, the attack against the Boston Marathon in April highlighted the danger posed by lone actors and insular groups not directly tied to terrorist organizations, as well as the difficulty of identifying these types of plots before they take place. Coupled with January's attack at the In Amenas gas facility and September's attack at a Nairobi shopping mall, these attacks could portend a terrorist interest in softer, less symbolic and less protected targets. 
248. Joseph Lieberman, (Former U.S. Senator, Connecticut), A FALSE 
NARRATIVE ENDANGERS THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Jan. 15, 2014, 8. First, al-Qaeda and its affiliates remain a ruthless, determined, and adaptive adversary. Second, the underlying ideology that inspires and drives al-Qaeda to attack us and our allies - the ideology of violent Islamist extremism - is neither defeated nor exhausted. It manifests itself not just in al-Qaeda but in terrorist organizations that are either unaffiliated with al-Qaeda or loosely affiliated with it. 
249. Brett Lovegrove, (CEO, City Security and Resilience Network), FROM AL- 
SHABAAB TO AL-NUSRA: HOW WESTERNERS JOINING TERROR GROUPS OVERSEAS AFFECT THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Oct. 9, 2013, 23. There is an increasing list of evidence that so called --soft targets‖ around the world are becoming more popular as terrorist targets than previously experienced. Reasons for this change in tactic could include the fact that many previously preferred targets such as embassies, military installations, and police stations are better protected than ever before and the attacker stands to fail in their objective. Another could be that a higher --kill rate‖ could be just as easily achieved in crowded places in the neighborhoods where people gather to shop, visit, relax, and work. This latter point is also far more likely to have a more emotional and psychological impact on society because this is the very place where people live and retreat from the stresses elsewhere. 
250. Matthew Olsen, (Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), THREATS TO THE 
HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 67. Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) remains the affiliate most likely to attempt transnational attacks against the United States. AQAP's three attempted attacks against the United States to date - the airliner plot of December 2009, an attempted attack against U.S.-bound cargo planes in October 2010, and an airliner plot in May 2012 - demonstrate the group's continued pursuit of high-profile attacks against the West, its awareness of Western security procedures, and its efforts to adapt. 
251. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. Americans are reluctant to accept terrorism is part of their daily lives, but attacks have been planned or attempted against American targets (usually airliners or urban areas) almost every 
year since 9/11. Europe faces even greater risk, given the thousands of European 
Union citizens who will return hardened and radicalized from fighting in Syria and Iraq. 
252. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. The constant planning and preparation for attack by terrorist groups is not apparent to the public. The dilemma in assessing risk is that it is discontinuous. There can be long periods with no noticeable activity, only to have the apparent calm explode. 
253. C. Michael Hurley, (Staff Member, 9/11 Commission), 9/11, TEN YEARS 
LATER, 2012, 139. It remains true that an attack could happen at any time. What shape will it take? We do not really know. Would it be a swarming Mumbai-style attack? Would it be an Oklahoma City attack? Would it be something different, a Fort Hood type of shooting? We do not know. In 2010 we witnessed the car bomb attempt in Times Square. Thus, although the capability of al-Qaeda has been seriously diminished, an attack could happen at any time. 
254. C. Michael Hurley, (Staff Member, 9/11 Commission), 9/11, TEN YEARS 
LATER, 2012, 133. Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta said recently, while still Director of CIA, that we are within reach of --strategically defeating al-Qaeda.‖ The killing of Osama bin Laden helped. Bin Laden is dead, but al-Qaeda is not. It remains adaptive and resilient. It is a network, not a hierarchy. Ayman Zawahiri is alive and has taken command of it. Although it is fragmented and decentralized, it is still lethal in places like Yemen, Somalia, Pakistan, and elsewhere. 
255. Report of the House Committee on Homeland Security, COMPILATION OF 
HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 153. Although almost 11 years have passed since the horrific terrorist attacks on September 11, we must not forget that the threat posed by al-Qaeda and its affiliates remains as deadly and paramount as ever. While successful counterterrorism operations removed the menace of Osama bin Laden and Anwar al-Awlaki from being a direct operational terror threat to the U.S. homeland, their ideological legacies and unwavering resolve to attack the United States and its Western allies live on. 
256. Robert Menendez, (Chair, Senate Comm. on Foreign Relations), 
COUNTERTERRORISM POLICIES AND PRIORITIES: ADDRESSING THE EVOLVING THREAT, Senate Foreign Relations Comm. Hearing, Mar. 20, 2013, 1. We know the core of al-Qaeda has been significantly degraded. We know that Ayman al-Zawahiri is not Osama bin Laden, and that the central organization is, as many have stated, on a path of decline that will be difficult to reverse. But, the threat that remains is now decentralized. We still live in a challenging world. Al-Qaeda affiliates and other emerging extremist groups still pose a threat to the United States and our national interests. 


257. Elizabeth Dickinson, (Staff), CHRISTIAN SCIENCE MONITOR, June 18, 2014. Retrieved Mar. 1, 2015. --The groups that are most threatening are the ones who manage to move from an external financing model to and internal financing model,‖ says Tom Keatinge, a former banker at J.P Morgan who writes and consults on terrorism financing. --ISIS has taken that to a whole new level. The money they have 
is similar to the military budget of a small European country.‖ 
258. Patrick Johnston, (Political Scientist, RAND Corporation), NEW YORK 
TIMES, Aug. 14, 2014. Retrieved Mar. 1, 2015 from Nexis. As ISIS's most recent annual report shows, the group is sophisticated, strategic, financially savvy and building structures that could survive for years to come. ISIS currently brings in more than $1 million a day in revenue and is now the richest terrorist group on the planet. 
259. Rod Nordland, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, June 21, 2014, A1. Behind the 
image of savagery that the extremists of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria present to the world, as casual executioners who kill helpless prisoners and behead even rival jihadis, lies a disciplined organization that employs social media and sophisticated financial strategies in the funding and governance of the areas it has conquered. The insurgents seized as much as $400 million from the central bank in Mosul, said Atheel Nujaifi, the governor of Nineveh Province, and reportedly emptied the vaults in all the other banks in a city of more than one million residents. Other officials cite lower figures when discussing the central bank theft. 
260. Audrey Kurth Cronin, (Prof., International Affairs, George Mason U.), 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS, Mar/Apr 2015. Retrieved Mar. 1, 2015 from 
http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/143043/audrey-kurth-cronin/isis-is-not-a-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/143043/audrey-kurth-cronin/isis-is-not-a-]
terrorist-group. Beginning in 2012, ISIS gradually took over key oil assets in eastern Syria; it now controls an estimated 60 percent of the country's oil production capacity. Meanwhile, during its push into Iraq last summer, ISIS also seized seven oil-producing operations in that country. The group manages to sell some of this oil on the black market in Iraq and Syria - including, according to some reports, to the Assad regime itself. ISIS also smuggles oil out of Iraq and Syria into Jordan and Turkey, where it finds plenty of buyers happy to pay below-market prices for illicit crude. All told, ISIS' revenue from oil is estimated to be between $1 million and $3 million per day. 
261. Audrey Kurth Cronin, (Prof., International Affairs, George Mason U.), 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS, Mar/Apr 2015. Retrieved Mar. 1, 2015 from 
http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/143043/audrey-kurth-cronin/isis-is-not-a-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/143043/audrey-kurth-cronin/isis-is-not-a-]
terrorist-group. And oil is only one element in the group's financial portfolio. Last June, when ISIS seized control of the northern Iraqi city of Mosul, it looted the provincial central bank and other smaller banks and plundered antiquities to sell on the black market. It steals jewelry, cars, machinery, and livestock from conquered residents. 
262. Betsy Hiel, (Staff), PITTSBURGH TRIBUNE REVIEW, Feb. 8, 2015. 
Retrieved Mar. 1, 2015 from Nexis. ISIS controls an area about the size of Belgium, 
despite recent defeats and a U.S.-led coalition's bombing campaign. Other terrorist or Islamist groups have pledged allegiance to it - Ansar Beit al Maqdis in Egypt's Sinai, for example, and some of the insurgents behind Libya's civil war. Meanwhile, the flow of foreign fighters to ISIS has not stopped. Tamimi predicts it will last for --at least a decade.‖ That is especially worrisome to Western and Middle Eastern governments that expect some fighters to return home and carry out attacks - a strategy encouraged in ISIS propaganda. 
263. David Wallis, (Staff), NEW YORK OBSERVER, Dec. 24, 2014. Retrieved Mar. 
1, 2015 from Nexis. The conquest of Iraq and Syria and of a few other countries in the Levant is a big deal as far as the West is concerned, but it pales in comparison to ISIS' true objectives, which is no less than conquering the entire world and to converting it into an Islamic society. The West has yet to comprehend that. 
264. Dianne Feinstein, (U.S. Senator, California & Chair of the Senate Intelligence 
Committee), USA TODAY, Sept. 8, 2014, 10A. I understand that many Americans don't want to become mired in another war. The conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq have claimed thousands of American lives and cost more than $1 trillion. But Americans need to understand ISIS' degree of viciousness as well as what will happen in the absence of U.S. leadership and action. If the United States fails to unite and lead the world against ISIS' horrific goals, we could suffer the consequences for decades to come. 
265. Donna Brazille, (Political Analyst, CNN), DUBUQUE TELEGRAPH 
HERALD, Sept. 14, 2014, A14. ISIL is not composed of your average terrorists. They are so extreme that al-Qaida threw them out. Now ISIL seeks to create its own trans-state out of two weakened nations. Their aim is to abolish the centuries-old system of nation-states, and replace it with a super-state, run by themselves. If ISIL succeeds, there will no longer be an Iraq or a Syria - or if they grow very strong, an Egypt, Jordan and who knows what else. The ancient cultures of these states will be gone. There will only be an expanding caliphate. 
266. Geoff Earl (Staff), NEW YORK POST, Sept. 24, 2014. Retrieved Mar. 1, 2015 
from http://nypost.com/2014/09/27/us-military-chief-15000-ground-troops-need-to-  [HYPERLINK: http://nypost.com/2014/09/27/us-military-chief-15000-ground-troops-need-to-]destroy-isis/. --This is about psychopathic terrorists that are trying to kill us, and we do have to realize that, whether we like it or not, they have already declared war on us,‖ said British Prime Minister David Cameron. --There isn't a ‗walk on by' option. 
There isn't an option of just hoping this will go away.‖ 
267. John McCain, (U.S. Senator, Arizona), NEW YORK TIMES, Aug. 30, 2014, 
A21. ISIS is now one of the largest, richest terrorist organizations in history. It occupies a growing safe haven the size of Indiana spanning two countries in the heart of the Middle East, and its ranks are filled with thousands of radicals holding Western passports, including some Americans. They require nothing more than a plane ticket to travel to United States cities. This is why the secretary of homeland security has called Syria --a matter of homeland security.‖ His warnings about ISIS have been echoed by the attorney general, the director of national intelligence and, now, the secretary of defense. Americans need to know that ISIS is not just a problem for Iraq and Syria. It is a threat to the United States. Doing too little to combat ISIS has been a problem. Doing less is certainly not the answer now. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	44 
 
 
 
268. Lawrence Haas, (Sr. Fellow, American Foreign Policy Council), DESERET MORNING NEWS, July 20, 2014. Retrieved Mar. 1, 2015 from Lexis. ISIL represents a particularly dangerous threat to the United States, one that grows as the radical group conquers more territory and - with such success - more easily recruits members and acquires more weapons and money. Citing multiple U.S. intelligence sources, NBC News labeled the ISIS threat against U.S. targets --extremely high.‖ Its leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, who has declared an Islamic caliphate in the territory ISIL controls, warned America earlier this year, --Soon we will be in direct confrontation, and the sons of Islam have prepared for such a day. So watch, for we are with you, watching.‖ The United States learned the hard way not to take warnings from terrorist leaders lightly, for Osama bin Laden had issued similar threats against the United States before al-Qaida carried them out on September 11, 2001. 
269. Lawrence Haas, (Sr. Fellow, American Foreign Policy Council), DESERET 
MORNING NEWS, July 20, 2014. Retrieved Mar. 1, 2015 from Lexis. That ISIL has its eyes set on the West is already evident. Law enforcement authorities have traced the group's ties to terrorist attacks and to attempts that were prevented in recent years in Europe, including the May attack at the Jewish Museum in Brussels that left three people dead. 
270. Trudy Rubin, (Staff), PHILADELPHIA INQUIRER, Aug. 24, 2014, 
C1. 
President Obama appears wedded to a strategy of containment - so far. But I've been 
struck by the intensity with which current and former government and military officials have described the threats posed to core U.S. interests by ISIS. There is a glaring disconnect between the urgent threat they describe and the administration's response. --This is an organization that has an apocalyptic end-of-days strategic vision that will eventually have to be defeated,‖ Gen. Martin Dempsey, chairman of the joint chiefs, said Thursday. Last month, Dempsey told a security conference that the U.S. military was preparing options to --contain, disrupt, and finally defeat [ISIS].‖ Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel has called ISIS --some of the most brutal, barbaric forces we've seen in the world today.‖ Former U.S. ambassador to Iraq, Ryan Crocker, an Arabic speaker with deep knowledge of the Mideast, told me, --ISIS is our strategic enemy. They are al-Qaeda on steroids. They present an existential threat 
to us.‖ 
271. Ted Poe, (U.S. Representative, Texas), IS AL-QAEDA WINNING? GRADING 
THE ADMINISTRATION'S COUNTERTERRORISM POLICY, House Foreign Affairs Committee Hearing, Apr. 8, 2014, 1. Al-Qaeda is not on the verge of defeat. The administration called al-Qaeda's affiliates a junior varsity squad of wannabes. If groups like ISIS and al-Nusra are junior varsity I would hate to see what the varsity team looks like. 
272. Jay Sekulow, (Chief Counsel, American Center for Law and Justice), RISE OF 
ISIS: A THREAT WE CAN'T IGNORE, 2014, 8-9. If we have feared and fought al- Qaeda, consider the following facts about ISIS: ISIS is more brutal than al-Qaeda, so brutal that al-Qaeda tried to persuade ISIS to change its tactics; ISIS is the --world's richest terrorist group;‖ ISIS controls more firepower and territory than any jihadist organization in history; ISIS has reportedly seized --40kg of radioactive uranium in Iraq,‖ raising fears that it could construct a --dirty bomb‖ that could spread deadly radiation in the atmosphere, rendering entire areas uninhabitable and killing or sickening everyone within the radius of its radiation cloud. 
273. Jay Sekulow, (Chief Counsel, American Center for Law and Justice), RISE OF 
ISIS: A THREAT WE CAN'T IGNORE, 2014, 9. ISIS's leader, Abu Bakr al- Baghdadi, reportedly told his American captors as he was released (we briefly detained him during the Iraq War), --I'll see you guys in New York.‖ And now an 
ISIS spokesman has pledged to raise the black flag of jihad over the White House. 
274. Jay Sekulow, (Chief Counsel, American Center for Law and Justice), RISE OF 
ISIS: A THREAT WE CAN'T IGNORE, 2014, 13. It has been thirteen years since September 11, 2001, when al-Qaeda (a less brutal organization than ISIS) flew passenger jets into the Pentagon and World Trade Center and hijacked Flight 93 before courageous Americans fought back, causing the plane to crash before its target. Nearly three thousand Americans died. Since September 11, thousands more Americans have died fighting jihad overseas, with tens of thousands wounded. After all that loss, after all that expense, jihad is still spreading. Indeed, our own government threw away victory in Iraq and is on the verge of leaving Afghanistan to its fate. 
275. Jay Sekulow, (Chief Counsel, American Center for Law and Justice), RISE OF 
ISIS: A THREAT WE CAN'T IGNORE, 2014, 27-28. Not only are ISIS leaders and fighters ruthless, but they also have obtained sufficient material assets to support a standing military force. They possess the will to use weapons of mass destruction to carry out their fanatical aims. They're no longer a terrorist gang, but a terrorist army possessing greater striking power than any terrorist force in the Middle East, greater striking power than al-Qaeda ever possessed. 
276. Jay Sekulow, (Chief Counsel, American Center for Law and Justice), RISE OF 
ISIS: A THREAT WE CAN'T IGNORE, 2014, 28. Ominously, this terrorist army is proving to be irresistibly attractive to a subset of British and American Muslim men, with hundreds (if not thousands) flocking to the black flag of jihad. By some estimates up to three hundred Americans currently fight for ISIS, all of them now enemy combatants against their own country. Britain faces an even worse crisis, with more of its Muslim young men volunteering to fight for ISIS than volunteering to serve in their own country's armed forces. 
277. Jay Sekulow, (Chief Counsel, American Center for Law and Justice), RISE OF 
ISIS: A THREAT WE CAN'T IGNORE, 2014, 40-41. ISIS has a huge war chest of money, military equipment, and materials available to carry out its threats. ISIS has captured significant amounts of high-tech U.S. military equipment abandoned by the Iraqi armed forces. 
278. Matthew Olsen, (Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), THREATS TO THE 
HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 70. Lebanese Hizballah remains committed to conducting terrorist activities worldwide and the group's activities could either endanger or target U.S. and other Western interests. The group has engaged in an increasingly aggressive terrorist campaign in recent years and will probably continue this pace of operations. 


279. Matthew Levitt, (Dir., Program on Counterterrorism and Intelligence, Washington Institute for Near East Policy), COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 37. Another option available to Hizballah would be to bring in outsiders to carry out an attack, using local sympathizers and operatives only for support functions. This is Hizballah's more traditional modus operandi, which it employed in Argentina in 1992 and 1994, in Thailand in 1994, and more 
recently in Azerbaijan, Turkey, Thailand, and elsewhere over the past few years. 
280. Matthew Levitt, (Dir., Program on Counterterrorism and Intelligence, 
Washington Institute for Near East Policy), COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 33. Hizballah has long had a substantial base of supporters in North America. This includes some operatives with military and operational training and a much larger pool of sympathizers and supporters who provide funding and some logistical support to the group but could be called upon to support operational activity should the group decide to carry out an attack here. 
281. Matthew Levitt, (Dir., Program on Counterterrorism and Intelligence, 
Washington Institute for Near East Policy), COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 35. Historically, within the larger community of people sympathetic to Hizballah here in the United States, there have been Hizballah militants with terrorist and military training. According to a 1994 FBI report, --Should the decision be made to strike within the U.S. borders, Hizballah has the infrastructure present to support or carry out a terrorist act. Certain Hizballah members in the United States have received paramilitary training, including 
explosives and firearms training.‖ 
282. Matthew Olsen, (Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), THREATS TO THE 
HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 69. Iran remains the foremost state sponsor of terrorism, and works through the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps-Qods Force and Ministry of Intelligence and Security to support groups that target U.S. and Israeli interests globally. Iran continues to be willing to conduct terrorist operations against its adversaries. This is demonstrated by Iran's links to terrorist operations in Azerbaijan, Georgia, India, and Thailand in 2012. Iran also continues to provide lethal aid and support the planning and execution of terrorist acts by other groups, in particular Lebanese Hizballah. 
283. Matthew Olsen, (Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), HOMELAND 
THREATS AND AGENCY RESPONSES, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee Hearing, Sept. 19, 2012, 65. The disrupted Iranian plot to assassinate the Saudi Ambassador to the United States in late 2011 demonstrates that Iran is more willing to conduct terrorist operations inside the United States than was previously assessed. As part of the plot, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard CorpsQods Force attempted to use a dual Iranian-U.S. national to recruit Mexican criminal organizations to conduct the assassination, raising our concerns that Iran may seek to leverage its growing ties to Latin America to conduct activities in the U.S. Iran has recently been linked to terrorist operations in Azerbaijan, Georgia, India, and Thailand. 
284. Matthew Levitt, (Dir., Program on Counterterrorism and Intelligence, 
Washington Institute for Near East Policy), COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 32. The U.S. intelligence community has assessed that Iranian leaders appear to be more willing than they may have been in the past to approve attacks in the United States. DNI James Clapper not only testified about Iranian plotting abroad, he also stated that the unprecedented assassination plot targeting the Saudi ambassador reflects the reality --that some Iranian officials - probably including Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei - have changed their calculus and are now more willing to conduct an attack in the United States in response to real or 
perceived U.S. actions that threaten the regime.‖ 
285. Mitchell Silber, (Dir., Intelligence Division, New York City Police Department), 
COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 9. Over the last 6 months, our analysts have studied terrorist plots with a plausible nexus to Iran that have been attempted or carried out in Azerbaijan, India, Georgia, Thailand, as well as here in Washington. What we have learned has heightened our concerns. Disconcertingly, these plots demonstrate that Iran and/or Hezbollah remain committed to striking against Israeli and Western targets. Further complicating the task of law enforcement is the diversity of methods evinced by these plots, including differences in the profile of perpetrators, types of explosives used, delivery method, and tradecraft. 
286. Mitchell Silber, (Dir., Intelligence Division, New York City Police Department), 
COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 10. While these incidents all occurred overseas, another plot uncovered in the past 6 months has forced a recalculation of the odds that Iran and its surrogate, Hezbollah, might seek to strike out against targets on American soil if hostilities commenced in the Persian Gulf or even as the Iranian regime feels itself increasingly under pressure. This was the plot foiled last October - obviously absent overt hostilities - in which a naturalized U.S. citizen of Iranian descent, directed by the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps, hired an individual whom he thought was a member of a Mexican drug cartel to assassinate the Saudi ambassador to the United States. The plan involved blowing up a Washington, DC, restaurant - potentially killing hundreds of Americans in the process. 
287. Peter King, (Chair, House Comm. on Homeland Security), COMPILATION OF 
HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 1. Now, as Iran moves closer to nuclear weapons, and there is increasing concern over war between Iran and Israel, we must also focus on Iran's secret operatives, and their No. 1 terrorist proxy force, Hezbollah, which we know is in America. That is right. We know Hezbollah operatives are here. The question is whether these Hezbollah operatives have the capacity to carry out attacks on the homeland, and how quickly they can become fully operational. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	45 
 
 
 
288. Peter King, (Chair, House Comm. on Homeland Security), COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 2. So will Iran launch terror strikes inside our homeland if it feels threatened? In light of last year's bomb plot, in light of the 20 Hezbollah cases prosecuted since 9/11, and in light of Hezbollah attacks overseas, we have a duty to prepare for the worst. Today's investigative hearing is the beginning of this committee's effort to size up the serious threat by one of international terrorism's most violent murder gangs. Now, how many Iranian and Hezbollah terrorists are here already? The highly-disciplined soldiers of Hezbollah are trained to lie low for years, or for decades. Those who have gone up against this enemy for our Government estimate the number to be, at a minimum, in the hundreds. Also, there are 55 Iranian diplomats at its U.N. mission in New York and another 29 Iranian officials here at its intersection in the District of Columbia, according to the Obama administration; many of whom, it must be presumed, are intelligence officers. 
289. Peter King, (Chair, House Comm. on Homeland Security), COMPILATION OF 
HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 2. Now, many have mistakenly assumed that Hezbollah operatives here were only capable of fund-raising for the Lebanon-based group through criminal fraud, such as counterfeiting and cigarette smuggling. But top intelligence officials and leaders have told us that Hezbollah is the group most capable of flipping its nation-wide network of criminal fund-raising cells into an operational terror force capable of great violence on orders from its leaders in Iran or Lebanon. In 2009, the Obama administration said that Hezbollah is, 
--the most technically capable terrorist group in the world.‖ 
290. David Rothkopf, (Pres., Chicago Council on Global Affairs), NATIONAL 
INSECURITY: AMERICAN LEADERSHIP IN AN AGE OF FEAR, 2014. 326. Within just over a year, the rise of ISIS would introduce the world to a new kind of terror threat from a group that was far better financed, equipped, organized, and attractive to foreign recruits than had al-Qaeda. Suddenly Obama and his national security team were forced to ask themselves whether the war they sought to end was not only not over but entering a dangerous new phase. 
291. Abdel Atwan, (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 265. Al Qaeda clearly wishes to build on the phenomenon of the Western convert and has allowed several such men to climb through the ranks, becoming prominent figures and, presumably, role models. German convert Bekkay Harrach, who took the moniker Al Hafidh Abu Talha al Almani, was killed in action in 2011, having become an Al Qaeda commander. Harrach appeared in several as-Sahab videos speaking German to threaten his native country and declare his commitment to Islam and Al Qaeda. 
292. Matthew Levitt, (Dir., Program on Counterterrorism and Intelligence, 
Washington Institute for Near East Policy), COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 36. In the summer of 2000, while investigating an interstate cigarette smuggling case, investigators stumbled upon a Hizballah cell based in Charlotte, North Carolina. Mohamad Hammoud, the cell's leader, was convicted of racketeering and providing material support to Hizballah. During the trail, evidence was presented that members of the cell worked closely with Sheikh Abbas Harake, a Hizballah military commander in southern Lebanon. In a letter seized by the FBI, Harake called Hammoud --a dear brother who has not forgotten his field of work,‖ and in an intercepted phone call with Harake, Hammoud repeatedly declares --we're at your service.‖ Personal photographs of his militancy - Hammoud at the Hizballah Center in Beirut, Hammoud and other co-conspirators posing with weapons, and Hammoud proudly standing in front of portraits of Ayatollah Khomeini and Hassan Nasrallah - were presented at trial, along with evidence of immigration fraud by him and members of his extended family, some of whom entered the United States illegally via Venezuela and Cyprus by way of false visas and fraudulent marriages. In an undated letter to Hammoud, Sheikh Abbas makes clear how the group feels about the United States: --Peace be on the pleasant blood that was shed and irrigated the tree of Islam in the east and west, to include the blood of the noblest of the Islamic Resistance's martyrs Mr. Abbas Al-Mousawy. As I greeted the virtuous ones, I must damn the evil ones. Damn America the criminal, and the arrogant Israel that commits injustice and hostility; and Allah, you are the everlasting 
over the enemies of Islam.‖ 
293. Dan Borelli, (Former FBI Special Agent in charge of the Joint Terrorism Task 
Force in New York), AL-SHABAAB: HOW GREAT A THREAT?, House Foreign Affairs Hearing, Oct. 3, 2013, 17. Lastly, we must not make the same mistake with al-Shabaab that we did with al-Qaeda, and that is viewing it as only a local or regional threat. In the early 1990s, many smart people ignored al-Qaeda because it was seen as a group only focused on the Middle East and Central Asia. We have seen how a terrorist organization gone unchecked can morph into a global threat. We must not let that happen with al-Shabaab. 
294. Seth Jones, (Associate Dir., International Security & Defense Policy Center, 
RAND Corporation), A FALSE NARRATIVE ENDANGERS THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Jan. 15, 2014, 26. But al-Shabaab possesses a competent external operations capability to strike targets outside of Somalia. The Westgate Mall attack was well-planned and well-executed, and involved sophisticated intelligence collection, surveillance, and reconnaissance of the target. These skills could be used for other types of attacks directly targeting the United States and its citizens. In addition, Americans from cities like Phoenix and Minneapolis have traveled to Somalia over the past several years to fight with al- Shabaab. Between 2007 and 2010, more than 40 Americans joined al-Shabaab, making the United States a primary exporter of Western fighters to the al-Qaeda- affiliated group. 
295. Scott Glick, (Sr. Counsel, National Security Division, U.S. Department of 
Justice & Visiting Prof., Law, Hofstra U.), INDIANA LAW JOURNAL, 2015, 1. While some may consider the use of a WMD by a terrorist to be a plot for an action movie, since the September 11, 2001, attacks, there have been increasing indications that malicious actors or organizations are attempting to obtain a WMD in order to cause massive devastation or catastrophic loss of life. 


296. Scott Glick, (Sr. Counsel, National Security Division, U.S. Department of Justice & Visiting Prof., Law, Hofstra U.), INDIANA LAW JOURNAL, 2015, 26. Although some believe that terrorists may be more focused on the acquisition and use of conventional weapons rather than WMDs, one expert has identified a number of reasons why a violent extremist group may wish to use a WMD, including: (a) the psychological impact that such a weapon would have on the American public; (b) the economic, political, and social instability that would reasonably be expected to follow the use of a WMD; (c) the physical destruction that could be caused to critical infrastructure, loss of life, and contamination to vital areas; (d) the --state-like‖ prestige that a terrorist group perceives it would receive from the use of a WMD; (e) a --fetishistic predisposition‖ toward the use of a WMD; (f) defensive aggression if the group perceived its own destruction was imminent; or (g) the group's need to outdo destruction that was caused by another group. 
297. Scott Glick, (Sr. Counsel, National Security Division, U.S. Department of 
Justice & Visiting Prof., Law, Hofstra U.), INDIANA LAW JOURNAL, 2015, 26. In May 2010, President Barack Obama stated in a national security strategy report that there was --no greater threat to the American people than weapons of mass destruction, particularly the danger posed by the pursuit of nuclear weapons by 
violent extremists and their proliferation to additional states.‖ 
298. Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 376. Since the end of the Cold War in 1991, materials and technologies related to weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) - nuclear, radiological, biological, and chemical weapons - have become increasingly available in the former Soviet Union, to rogue states and terrorist groups. Terrorists' interest in chemical and biological weapons is not surprising, given the relative ease with which some of these weapons can be produced and detonated to inflict large numbers of casualties, without being detected. 
299. Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 54. Rogelio Pfirter, Director General of the UNO for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, has stated that --chemical terrorism has been identified in different regions of the world as the number one potential threat.‖ He has also said: --The spread of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) - chemical, biological, nuclear and radiological - poses one of the most serious threats to international security. No country in the world today can remain indifferent to the catastrophic possibility that terrorists may acquire these deadly weapons and use 
them against innocent civilians.‖ 
300. Peter King, (Chair, House Committee on Homeland Security), 
COUNTERTERRORISM EFFORTS TO COMBAT A CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL, RADIOLOGICAL, AND NUCLEAR (CBRN) ATTACK ON THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Apr. 25, 2013, 3. An attack using a less sophisticated radiological dispersion device, often called a dirty bomb, would be less deadly than a nuclear blast but it still would involve the loss of human life and would have incalculable economic, environmental, and psychological impacts on our Nation. 
301. Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 375. Weapons of mass destruction, and unconventional weapons - namely biological, chemical, and nuclear weapons systems - pose the gravest threat to mankind. The possibility of terrorists using these weapons to carry out a global nuclear jihad cannot be ignored, especially with the disclosure of relationships between Pakistani nuclear experts and OBL. 
302. Joel Rosenberg, (Journalist), IMPLOSION: CAN AMERICA RECOVER 
FROM ITS ECONOMIC AND SPIRITUAL CHALLENGES IN TIME?, 2012, 162. Terrorists' acquiring weapons of mass destruction is a nightmare scenario that we must avoid at all costs. To prevent the worst from happening, the U.S. and other Western governments must constantly remain vigilant. After all, what these fanatics need most in order to accomplish their goals are Western ignorance, apathy, and lack of moral clarity. If the West can be lulled to sleep, the Radicals will have a much 
better chance of pulling off a series of attacks that make 9/11 pale by comparison. 
303. Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 378. Terrorists could also make a nuclear explosive by obtaining reactor-grade plutonium from MOX, a mixture of plutonium oxide and uranium oxide. Additionally, nuclear terrorism can be carried out by sabotaging nuclear power plants and storage facilities, transporting nuclear bombs, stealing or purchasing enriched uranium and plutonium, and using the help of unauthorized personnel to assemble nuclear material into a bomb, which would then be detonated in a public place. 
304. Michael Leiter, (Former Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), A NEW 
PERSPECTIVE ON THREATS TO THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Feb. 13, 2013, 25. There is no doubt that smallish terrorist attacks or at least attempts will continue to occur at home and abroad. Such attacks can cause enormous pain and suffering to victims and their families, but they are clearly of a scale - at least with respect to absolute numbers killed - that is dwarfed by other societal ills such as routine criminal activity. The same cannot be said of terrorists' use of weapons of mass destruction - and more specifically biological weapons or an improvised nuclear device (IND). 
305. Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 378-379. On October 28, 2008, Dr. Mohamed El Baradei, Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), stood at the rostrum of the United Nations General Assembly and warned the world about nuclear terror: --The possibility of terrorists obtaining nuclear or other radioactive material remains a grave threat. The number of incidents reported to the Agency involving the theft or loss of nuclear or radioactive material is disturbingly high. Equally troubling is the fact that much of this material is not subsequently recovered. Sometimes material is found which had not been reported missing. We live in a time 
of increasing nuclear peril.‖ 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	46 
 
 
 
306. Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 379-380. AQ terrorist Abu Zubaydah told U.S. investigators that AQ had the ability to make dirty bombs with the above types of radiation devices. In the 1990s, AQ tried to purchase enriched uranium from South Africa and Germany. After the 9/11 attacks on the United States, OBL contacted Pakistan's top nuclear scientists, Sultan Bashiruddin Mahmood and Abdul Majeed in Kabul, to develop nuclear weapon capability for AQ. It is still mysterious. 
307. Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 383. Professor Walter Laqueur, Chairman of the International Research Council at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, has written: --In Pakistan, quasi-religious shrines have been erected to honor the Islamic bomb in major cities, and there is little doubt that if terrorist groups of this kind would gain possession of such weapons, they would not hesitate to use them 
even if the consequences would be suicidal.‖ 
308. Ronald Sievert, (Prof., Government, U. Texas), NATIONAL SECURITY LAW 
JOURNAL, 2014, 50. Those who underestimate Al Qaeda in comparison with the Germany and Japan of former times ignore the fact that if Al Qaeda were to acquire Weapons of Mass Destruction (--WMD‖) it potentially would pose a greater threat than our previous enemies. 
309. Scott Glick, (Sr. Counsel, National Security Division, U.S. Department of 
Justice & Visiting Prof., Law, Hofstra U.), INDIANA LAW JOURNAL, 2015, 32. More than any other WMD that could be used by a terrorist, a nuclear weapon would --represent a ‗game-changing' event far exceeding the impact of 9/11.‖ --Nuclear weapons draw their explosive force from fission, fusion, or a combination of these two methods.‖ While one expert believes that a fusion-based nuclear weapon would be --too sophisticated for fabrication‖ by terrorists, and while fissionable materials exist only in very minute quantities, purchasing, stealing, or otherwise obtaining highly enriched types of uranium, plutonium, or similar materials would enable terrorists with sophisticated knowledge and expertise to make an improvised nuclear device. 
310. C. Michael Hurley, (Staff Member, 9/11 Commission), 9/11, TEN YEARS 
LATER, 2012, 137. On the team I managed on the 9/11 Commission, there was a brilliant young Ph.D. from Columbia University. One day in fall 2003, as part of the many interviews we conducted of people on the NSC staff, we interviewed a specialist on nuclear issues assigned to the counterterrorism office. She had been in this assignment since the late 1990s. She told us that on many days, as she drove from her home to her White House office, because of the intelligence she had read, she expected to see a mushroom cloud over Washington, D.C., from a terrorist detonation of a nuclear device. My colleague and I were stunned. At the time, the American public had no inkling that these experts had such concerns. 
311. Michael Leiter, (Former Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), 
COUNTERTERRORISM POLICIES AND PRIORITIES: ADDRESSING THE EVOLVING THREAT, Senate Foreign Relations Comm. Hearing, Mar. 20, 2013, 11. There is no doubt that smallish terrorist attacks or at least attempts will continue to occur at home and abroad. Such attacks can cause enormous pain and suffering to victims and their families, but they are clearly of a scale - at least with respect to absolute numbers killed - that is dwarfed by other societal ills such as routine criminal activity. The same cannot be said of terrorists' use of weapons of mass destruction - and more specifically biological weapons or an improvised nuclear device (IND). Although we have also made progress in reducing the likelihood of terrorists obtaining WMD, for the foreseeable future we are faced with the possibility that a terrorist organization will successfully acquire these weapons. 
312. Peter King, (Chair, House Committee on Homeland Security), 
COUNTERTERRORISM EFFORTS TO COMBAT A CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL, RADIOLOGICAL, AND NUCLEAR (CBRN) ATTACK ON THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Apr. 25, 2013, 2-3. A nuclear event in any U.S. city would be a catastrophe. For instance, it is estimated that a ground burst of a 150-kiloton device at the base of the Empire State Building in an unevacuated Manhattan at noon on a workday in good weather would ultimately kill or wound more than 1.5 million innocent people. That is why President Obama stated that the single biggest threat to U.S. security, both short-term, medium-term, and longterm, would be the possibility of a terrorist organization obtaining a nuclear weapon. Al- Qaeda is --trying to secure a nuclear weapon - a weapon of mass destruction that they have no compunction at using,‖ and that is a quote from President Obama. 
313. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 112. Both Allison and Jenkins were referring to groups or cells of terrorists and not to lone wolf operatives, for which obtaining and using a nuclear weapon would be even more difficult. Lone wolves are, however, capable of setting off a --dirty bomb,‖ which is not a nuclear bomb but rather a conventional explosive filled with radioactive material. While such an attack would not kill large numbers of people, except for those killed by the initial blast, it would still cause widespread panic and health problems related to airborne radiation. 
314. Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 49. The Brookings Institution scholar Bruce Riedel, who served as the co-author of President Obama's review of the U.S. Afghanistan- Pakistan strategy, reflected the administration's concern in a recent interview. He said that Pakistan --has more terrorists per square mile than any place else on earth, and it 
has a nuclear weapons program that is growing faster than anyplace else on earth.‖ 
315. Jay Sekulow, (Chief Counsel, American Center for Law and Justice), RISE OF 
ISIS: A THREAT WE CAN'T IGNORE, 2014, 41. Ominously, ISIS also possesses radiological material that could make dirty bombs. Dirty bombs are created by combining conventional explosives with low-level radioactive material. If a dirty bomb is detonated, in addition to the raw blast effect of the bomb, it can spread radiation in a wide area, potentially causing radiation sickness to those exposed and rendering the area uninhabitable for an extended time. 


316. Jay Sekulow, (Chief Counsel, American Center for Law and Justice), RISE OF ISIS: A THREAT WE CAN'T IGNORE, 2014, 41. ISIS has stolen eighty-eight pounds of uranium compounds from Mosul University and has the capacity to gain even more radioactive material. Waste recovered from universities and hospitals across northern Iraq has the potential to contribute radioactive material for a dirty bomb. Further, it is not beyond imagination that ISIS could also obtain chemical weapons from Syrian depots for its arsenal. In fact, it has already captured old stocks of Iraqi chemical weapons. Were ISIS to obtain increasing amounts of weapons of 
mass destruction, the global danger of this group would increase exponentially. 
317. Scott Glick, (Sr. Counsel, National Security Division, U.S. Department of 
Justice & Visiting Prof., Law, Hofstra U.), INDIANA LAW JOURNAL, 2015, 30. One expert has observed that some biological weapons --offer a means of attack that is potentially cheap, lethal, and hard to detect.‖ The most effective means of distributing a biological weapon is in the form of a dry or wet aerosol, which typically is a --cloud of solid particles suspended in the air.‖ Although other means of delivery may include cluster bombs, artillery shells, rockets, and sophisticated sprayers, the use of large-scale delivery systems is thought to be associated with the military development of biological weapons. Other nontechnical and less expensive delivery mechanisms include human self-infection or the use of animal vectors, improvised crop-dusting airplanes, small backpack sprayers, or purse-sized atomizers. 
318. Alexander Garza, (Assistant Secretary, U.S. Dept. of Homeland Security), 
BIOWATCH PRESENT AND FUTURE: MEETING MISSION NEEDS FOR EFFECTIVE BIOSURVEILLANCE?, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Sept. 13, 2012, 9. Terrorism continues to be a threat to our Nation, including the use of biological organisms as a means. In fact, in a recent publication by a known terrorist organization, it was stated that the use of poisons or chemical-biological weapons against population centers is allowed and is strongly recommended due to its great effect on the enemy. 
319. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 109. Among the biological agents that could be used by lone wolves are bacterial agents such as anthrax, viral agents such as smallpox, and toxin agents such as ricin. An important distinction to make regarding biological agents is that some, such as anthrax, cause infectious but not contagious diseases, while others, such as smallpox, cause infectious and contagious diseases. 
320. Kathryn Brinsfield, (Acting Assistant Secretary, U.S. Dept. of Homeland 
Security), BIOWATCH: LESSONS LEARNED AND THE PATH FORWARD, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, June 10, 2014, 9. Biological threats, including bioterrorism, pandemics, emerging infectious diseases, and animal and plant diseases, remain a top homeland security risk. A biological attack could impact any sector of our society and would place enormous burdens on our Nation's public health, security, and critical infrastructures. 
321. Robert Kadlec, (Former Special Assistant to the President for Biodefense), 
BIOTERRORISM: ASSESSING THE THREAT, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Feb. 11, 2014, 7. Simply stated, BW can kill as many people or more than the nuclear weapon. The technological barriers to achieve this potential are significantly less for nuclear weapons. Graham Allison, the founding dean of Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of Government and a leader and an expert on nuclear proliferation said, --Nuclear terrorism is a preventable catastrophe, and the reason it is preventable is because the material to make a nuclear bomb can't be made by terrorists. Can I prevent terrorists from getting into their hands anthrax or other 
pathogens? No. Even our best efforts can't do that.‖ 
322. Robert Kadlec, (Former Special Assistant to the President for Biodefense), 
BIOTERRORISM: ASSESSING THE THREAT, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Feb. 11, 2014, 8. During my tenure as a special assistant to the President, we evaluated and modeled the human and economic impact that a couple of grams, kilograms of anthrax could have on a major metropolitan area. Such an attack could threaten millions, kill several hundred thousand, and result in a direct economic impact of greater than $1 trillion. 
323. Robert Kadlec, (Former Special Assistant to the President for Biodefense), 
BIOTERRORISM: ASSESSING THE THREAT, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Feb. 11, 2014, 8. Our intelligence was less than perfect in identifying the al- Qaeda clandestine BW weapons laboratory in Afghanistan prior to the invasion of the United States in the 2002. The possibility and probability that al-Qaeda may still harbor the strategic intent and may still pursue BW capabilities to attack the United States should be sufficient impetus. The risk of surprise is great and more preparedness, not less, is our greatest insurance policy. 
324. Robert Kadlec, (Former Special Assistant to the President for Biodefense), 
BIOTERRORISM: ASSESSING THE THREAT, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Feb. 11, 2014, 10. The 2008 Weapons of Mass Destruction Commission chaired by Senators Bob Graham and Jim Talent further highlighted growing trends in the spread of enabling technology and led to their principle finding that the risk of a WMD attack was rising and that the terrorist use of biological weapons was greater than the likelihood of terrorists building or obtaining a nuclear device. 
325. Robert Kadlec, (Former Special Assistant to the President for Biodefense), 
BIOTERRORISM: ASSESSING THE THREAT, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Feb. 11, 2014, 12. According to the 2005 Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction: --al- Qa'ida's biological program was further along, particularly with regard to Agent X [anthrax], than pre-war intelligence indicated. The program was extensive, well- organized, and operated for two years before September 11, but intelligence insights into the program were limited. The program involved several sites in Afghanistan. Two of these sites contained commercial equipment and were operated by individuals with special training. Documents found indicated that while al-Qa'ida's primary interest was Agent X, the group had considered acquiring a variety of other biological agents. The documents obtained at the training camp included scientific articles and handwritten notes pertaining to Agent X. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	47 
 
 
 
326. Robert Kadlec, (Former Special Assistant to the President for Biodefense), BIOTERRORISM: ASSESSING THE THREAT, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Feb. 11, 2014, 12. The possibility that al-Qaeda then and now may still harbor the strategic intent and pursued capabilities to attack the United States with biological weapons is a lingering concern that should not be ignored. 
327. Robert Kadlec, (Former Special Assistant to the President for Biodefense), 
BIOTERRORISM: ASSESSING THE THREAT, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Feb. 11, 2014, 13. Biological weapons could inflict grievous harm on America, equal to and potentially greater than nuclear weapons, and any investments to defend against them is a modest insurance policy against an uncertain future. Our best defense remains a robust defense: A credible and rapid means to detect and mitigate such attacks and equally credible means to attribute and hold those accountable. 
328. Susan Brooks, (U.S. Respresentative, Indiana), BIOTERRORISM: ASSESSING 
THE THREAT, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Feb. 11, 2014, 1. In his 2003 report, --Catastrophic Bioterrorism, What is to Be Done,‖ Richard Danzig noted that the 1 gram of anthrax, which I might note is about a sugar-packet size, was sent to Senator Leahy, it contained a trillion spores, an amount that if effectively 
dispersed, could kill thousands of people and could cause great economic damage. 
329. Tom Inglesby, (Dir., UPMC Center for Health Security), BIOTERRORISM: 
ASSESSING THE THREAT, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Feb. 11, 2014, 13-14. The know-how to make biological weapons is now in the reach of groups or individuals with the right scientific background. Components for making biological weapons are on eBay, equipment for disseminating them is in hardware stores and agricultural supply stores. The technology is dual-use. It has both good and dangerous practical purposes in the world. It can't be locked away. There may be no obvious signal of bioweapons development, and we shouldn't expect to have warning regarding its use in the future. 
330. William Jenkins, (Dir., Homeland Security and Justice Issues, Government 
Accountability Office), BIOWATCH PRESENT AND FUTURE: MEETING MISSION NEEDS FOR EFFECTIVE BIOSURVEILLANCE?, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Sept. 13, 2012, 16. A large-scale biological event, such as a terrorist attack with a deadly pathogen or a naturally-occurring pandemic, could result in hundreds of thousands of casualties and have devastating effects on the Nation. Recognizing that a bioterrorist attack could be difficult to prevent, attention has been focused on biosurveillance; that is, the ability to quickly detect and characterize a biological attack or the emergence and spread of a deadly infectious disease. 
331. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 249-250. Another innovative lone wolf tactic in the coming years may involve bioterrorism. We have seen how a lone wolf was able to perpetrate the first anthrax letter attack in history. Although that's not considered a major attack, since the casualty total was relatively low (five people killed), the next time a lone wolf uses bioweapons, we may not be as lucky. I discussed some of the potential scenarios involving a mass-casualty bioterrorism attack perpetrated by a lone wolf in chapter 3. These range from dispersing anthrax spores from a low-flying airplane or crop-duster to releasing ricin in the heating, ventilation, air-conditioning (HVAC) system of a building. 
332. Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 386. A bioterrorism attack is the deliberate release of viruses, bacteria, or other germs (known as agents) that are used to cause illness or death in people, animals, or plants. Biological agents can be spread through air, water, or food. Terrorists may use biological agents because they can be extremely difficult to detect and do not cause illness for several hours to several days. 
333. Peter King, (U.S. Rep., New York), ASSESSING THE THREAT TO THE 
HOMELAND FROM AL-QAEDA OPERATIONS IN IRAN AND SYRIA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearings, May 22, 2013, 4. The Syrian situation is made more dangerous by the availability - and even use - of military-grade chemical weapons. If even a fraction of Syria's vast stockpile of poisonous and toxic gases falls into the hands of terrorist groups, these weapons of mass destruction will pose a grave threat to homeland security. 
334. Leonard Cole, (Dir., Program on Terror and Security, U. of Maryland), 
COUNTERTERRORISM EFFORTS TO COMBAT A CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL, RADIOLOGICAL, AND NUCLEAR (CBRN) ATTACK ON THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Apr. 25, 2013, 23. Allegations that chemical weapons were used in Syria either by its government or by opposition forces remain unresolved. In any case, worries persist that in the midst of the civil war there, Syrian chemical agents could fall into the hands of terrorists. 
335. Abdel Atwan (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 34. The most serious attack on US soil since 9/11 took place on 5 November 2009 at one of the largest US military bases in the world, Fort Hood in Texas. A high-ranking military figure and psychiatrist, Major Nidal Malik Hasan was meant to be assessing a group of officers and men due to depart for a tour of duty in Afghanistan when he opened fire on them with a semi-automatic weapon, killing thirteen and wounding thirty. Hassan's parents came from Palestine and it transpired that he had been in regular e-mail contact with the late Anwar al-Awlaki, AQAP's American-born cleric, who commended the attack and called Hassan a jihadi hero. 
336. Randy Beers, (Acting Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland Security), 
THREATS TO THE HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 45. Lone offenders and small groups of individuals are one of the greatest and most difficult threats to counter. In recent years, we have observed several acts of violence by lone offenders against military targets, as well as attempted attacks targeting civilian populations by individuals inspired by extremist ideology. Domestic terrorism, and those individuals not inspired by foreign terrorist groups, remains a persistent threat. 


337. Robert Mueller, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), HOMELAND THREATS AND AGENCY RESPONSES, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee Hearing, Sept. 19, 2012, 77. Unfortunately, we have seen a surge in lone offender incidents, as we witnessed with the shooting at the Sikh Temple in Wisconsin. Many lone offenders may have some affiliation with known domestic terrorist organizations, such as violent white supremacist groups, anarchists, animal rights and environmental extremists, and militia groups, whose activities may violate federal law. These lone offenders may be loosely affiliated with such groups, but their actions typically are not directed by these groups. They may be self-trained, self-financed, and self-executing, but they are motivated to take action in furtherance of their ideological beliefs. 
338. Abdel Atwan (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 18-19. A report by the US Congressional Research Service published in November 2011 warned of a significant increase in ‗lone wolf' jihadi attacks, and said that individuals had been arrested in connection with thirty-two actual, planned or failed attacks on US soil in just seventeen months from May 2009 until October 2010. 
339. Beau Barnes, (JD Candidate, Boston U. School of Law), BOSTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, Oct. 2012, 1648. Lone wolves' modus operandi in large part explains why they have received such hyperbolic press coverage: their status as "loners" makes them poorly understood, and, worst of all, entirely unpredictable. This new threat has been typified in several recent attacks, including Nidal Hasan's shooting at Fort Hood, Texas, and Naser Jason Abdo's attempted attack at the same base. Hasan, perhaps the most visible lone wolf terrorist in the United States, led a relatively private life as an Army psychiatrist, and his attack, carried out entirely on his own, was a shock to even his closest friends and family. Rather than a strict "command and control" relationship with a broader organization, these individuals have undertaken terrorist plots with little or no outside involvement from other terrorist groups. 
340. Beau Barnes, (JD Candidate, Boston U. School of Law), BOSTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, Oct. 2012, 1649. Declaring that Al Qaeda's strategy now principally focuses on disaffected loners perhaps overstates the point, but the law enforcement efforts of the past decade have drastically reduced the number of options available to prospective terrorists. Lone wolf terrorism, then, is not just a subset of the broader category of homegrown terrorism, but is, more accurately, an ineluctable tactical evolution of the Al Qaeda social movement. Terrorists "learn from experience and modify their tactics and targets to exploit perceived vulnerabilities and avoid observed strengths." Al Qaeda's members are simply "adapting to their 
hostile physical environment." 
341. Rocco Parascondola, (Staff), NEW YORK DAILY NEWS, Apr. 3, 2015, 5. He 
said the changing nature of terror - with more lone wolves looking to carry out jihad on American soil - makes the funding all the more necessary. "Given how the terrorist threat to the world is evolving, homeland security is becoming a matter of hometown security," [U.S. Assistant Secretary of Homeland Security, Jeh] Johnson said. "The terrorist threat is more decentralized, more diffuse, more complicated. It involves the potential lone wolf actor. It involves the effective use of social media, 
the Internet." 
342. Michael Ryan, (Sr. Vice President, Middle East Institute), DECODING AL- 
QAEDA'S STRATEGY: THE DEEP BATTLE AGAINST AMERICA, 2013, 264. The cost of one individual's decision to follow al-Qaeda's line can be high. In 2009, the Fort Hood shooter caused the deaths of thirteen people and wounded thirty-one. The risk could be greater if an individual has received training in bomb making. If Najibulla Zazi, trained in explosives in a terrorist training camp in Pakistan, had not been arrested before he could carry out his bomb plot in 2009, or if Faisal Shahzad, allegedly also trained in Pakistan, had managed to detonate his bomb in Times Square in 2010, we could have witnessed casualties on a massive scale similar to the Madrid train bombings in 2004 or the London public transport bombings in 2005. 
343. Michael Ryan, (Sr. Vice President, Middle East Institute), DECODING AL- 
QAEDA'S STRATEGY: THE DEEP BATTLE AGAINST AMERICA, 2013, 262- 263. One of the major concerns periodically expressed by top American officials is the threat of homegrown or lone-wolf terrorists, what some call --sleeper cells.‖ The concept of a sleeper cell is not new and was a feature of the Cold War. It is probably a better term because it captures the dangerous dynamics of a true al-Qaeda cell. Abu Mus'ab al-Suri described best the ideal characteristics of an al-Qaeda sleeper cell. His emphasis was not on the use of the Internet, although he recognized its potential, but rather on clandestine individual or small-cell jihad as a means to further jihadist political goals. He began where most discussions of lone-wolf terrorism end, with a random act of violence by an individual infused with a sense of rage and perceived humiliation. 
344. Beau Barnes, (JD Candidate, Boston U. School of Law), BOSTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, Oct. 2012, 1612. In recent years, a new type of terrorist threat has emerged: the "lone wolf." Lone wolves present a challenge for current law enforcement and prosecutorial approaches to combating terrorism because these individuals are radicalized without significant contact with others and operate alone. 
345. Beau Barnes, (JD Candidate, Boston U. School of Law), BOSTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, Oct. 2012, 1615. The relatively novel threat of lone wolf terrorism presents a challenge for traditional law enforcement and prosecutorial approaches. Indeed, the threat is likely to increase in prevalence. Security experts note that the threat of lone wolf terrorism is one of the United States' main vulnerabilities today. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	48 
 
 
 
346. Beau Barnes, (JD Candidate, Boston U. School of Law), BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, Oct. 2012, 1615. President Obama stated in 2011 that "the most likely scenario that we have to guard against right now ends up being more of a lone wolf operation than a large, well-coordinated terrorist attack." Events of the past few years corroborate this statement. Pimentel, Rezwan Ferdaus (a U.S. citizen arrested in Massachusetts for plotting to bomb the Pentagon and U.S. Capitol), Army Major Nidal Hasan (an Army doctor who killed thirteen individuals and wounded thirty-two others at Fort Hood, Texas), Arid Uka (a Kosovar Islamist who killed two U.S. service members in Germany), and Naser Jason Abdo (an enlisted soldier arrested for attempting to detonate a bomb near Fort Hood) are but a few of the many examples of this type of terrorism. 
347. Jane Harman, (Former U.S. Representative from California & now an analyst at 
the Wilson Center), A FALSE NARRATIVE ENDANGERS THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Jan. 15, 2014, 13. Since 9/11, there have been almost 400 home-grown terrorists indicted on terror-related charges or killed before they could be indicted. The biggest threats to the U.S. homeland are home- grown, lone-wolf terror attacks and cyber-terror attacks. 
348. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 251. The lone wolf is also forcing us to rethink some of our basic concepts about terrorism. This reevaluation will likely continue in the coming years, as lone wolves make their presence felt throughout the world. The individual terrorist has proven repeatedly that he or she can be as dangerous and have as much impact on societies and governments as the larger, better-financed, and better-trained terrorist organizations. 
349. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 256-257. When Timothy McVeigh acknowledged blowing up the federal building in Oklahoma City and stated, --Isn't it scary that one man could reap this kind of hell?‖ he got at the heart of the lone wolf terrorist threat. It seems mind-boggling that in a world where some terrorist groups have global networks of highly trained militants, a lone individual is capable of matching, and sometimes exceeding, the carnage, destruction, and grief that larger and better-financed extremist groups can inflict upon society. It is a somewhat discomforting thought that after all the resources, time, and personnel are expended in the fight against terrorism - usually terrorist groups, their affiliates, or their state sponsors - along can come a Timothy McVeigh or an Anders Breivik to reap their own --kind of hell‖ upon all of us. 
350. David Lungren, (U.S. Representative, California), NOTRE DAME JOURNAL 
OF LAW, ETHICS & PUBLIC POLICY, 2012, 452-453. Although the lone wolf provision has not yet been used in an investigation of a terror suspect, there are reasons to believe that the lone wolf may become the future face of terrorism. In the House Homeland Security Committee, on which I am also privileged to serve, former 9/11 Commission member Lee Hamilton warned that "lone wolves, who are not connected to formal terrorist organizations, are the most difficult to detect in part 
because they do not fit any particular ethnic, economic, educational or social profile." 
351. David Lungren, (U.S. Representative, California), NOTRE DAME JOURNAL 
OF LAW, ETHICS & PUBLIC POLICY, 2012, 453. The potential threat posed by the lone wolf terrorist should not be dismissed. In 2011, a twenty-year-old student from Saudi Arabia was charged with attempting to use weapons of mass destruction in the Dallas area. Our intelligence officials must be equipped to address this growing challenge posed by alienated individuals who are attracted to the broader extremist movement. There is simply no reason why this additional tool should not be available simply because it is unknown whether or not a suspect is affiliated with a terrorist organization. 
352. David Lungren, (U.S. Representative, California), NOTRE DAME JOURNAL 
OF LAW, ETHICS & PUBLIC POLICY, 2012, 453. President Obama discussed the magnitude of this threat in observing that "the most likely scenario that we have to guard against right now ends up being more of a lone wolf operation than a large, well-coordinated terrorist attack." He noted further that "when you've got one person who is deranged or driven by a hateful ideology, they can do a lot of damage, and it's a lot harder to trace those lone wolf operators." The President's description of the evolving nature of the terrorist threat is a sober warning which reflects the best assessment of our intelligence community. The danger posed by the lone wolf is real. It is imperative that our intelligence officials have the ability to monitor these non- U.S. persons who present a clear and present danger to the safety of the American public. 
353. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 183. Leaderless cells, however, can inflict as many casualties and cause as much destruction as the larger, more organized terrorist groups. Authorities often do not know who these individuals are or where their cells are located, in addition to various other factors that inhibit taking effective action against them. The threat, as Sageman points out, --has evolved from infiltration by outside trained terrorists against whom international liaison cooperation and border protection are effective to inside homegrown, self-financed, self-trained terrorists against whom the most effective countermeasures would be to 
stop the process of radicalization before it reaches its violent end.‖ 
354. Bennie Thompson, (U.S. Rep., Mississippi), ASSESSING THE THREAT TO 
THE HOMELAND FROM AL-QAEDA OPERATIONS IN IRAN AND SYRIA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearings, May 22, 2013, 8. The attacks of September 11, 2001 did not just result in the deaths of 2250 people, it also resulted in nearly $80 billion in economic damage with about $32.5 billion covered by nearly 150 domestic and international insurers and reinsurers. In the wake of the attacks, commercial insurance insurers began excluding terrorism coverage from policies provided to businesses across the country. 
355. Avidan Cover, (Prof., Law, Case Western Reserve U. School of Law), 
CARDOZO LAW REVIEW, Apr. 2014, 1417. It is difficult - if not impossible - to determine the risk of a terrorist attack. The government always runs the chance of underestimating or overestimating the probability of an attack, both of which have costs. The 9/11 attacks themselves were attributed to a failure to appreciate the risk. In its report on the September 11th attacks, the 9/11 Commission criticized the government for its failure to imagine the likelihood of an attack by Al Qaeda. 


356. Avidan Cover, (Prof., Law, Case Western Reserve U. School of Law), CARDOZO LAW REVIEW, Apr. 2014, 1419-1420. This Article offers another explanation for the Court's deference: The Justices are afraid. They are afraid of terrorism. They are afraid of what could happen to our security if they rein in government. This Article examines the ways in which fear has affected and influenced judges in addressing terrorism. Importantly, the discussion is not limited to enemy combatant cases or to the Supreme Court, but examines the ways in which the post-9/11 heuristic has affected a range of judicial opinions, from limits on political protests, to airport security measures, to criminal prohibitions of material support of terrorism. 
357. Avidan Cover, (Prof., Law, Case Western Reserve U. School of Law), 
CARDOZO LAW REVIEW, Apr. 2014, 1418. Due to the uncertainty of the harm and the likelihood of the risk of a terrorist attack, policymakers reduce evidentiary requirements and expand definitions of imminence in order to justify counterterrorism measures. No one wants to be wrong again. This post-9/11 heuristic now pervades our society, our government, and our courts. 
358. Avidan Cover, (Prof., Law, Case Western Reserve U. School of Law), 
CARDOZO LAW REVIEW, Apr. 2014, 1417-1418. The threat of terrorism now summons a post-9/11 impression that although terrible harm may be uncertain, we must act as though it is imminent. Such thinking is a variant of the Precautionary Principle, which Cass Sunstein describes as the idea that --action should be taken to correct a problem as soon as there is evidence that harm may occur, not after the harm 
has already occurred.‖ 
359. C. Michael Hurley, (Staff Member, 9/11 Commission), 9/11, TEN YEARS 
LATER, 2012, 134. Now, al-Qaeda is adapting - a fragmented al-Qaeda is following a worrisome strategy of innovation. October 2010 witnessed the disturbing discovery of explosives packed in toner cartridges addressed to Chicago synagogues and shipped on FedEx and UPS cargo flights from Yemen. The plot failed, but dearly, the enemy is looking for new ways to inflict great harm and damage. That would have been an attack in which the people executing it would not have even crossed our borders. 
360. Report of the House Committee on Homeland Security, COMPILATION OF 
HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 157. In June 2011, the committee convened its second hearing, which examined the threat of Muslim-American radicalization within the United States prison system. The current problem of Muslim-American radicalization in U.S. prisons is significant and has been acknowledged by Executive Branch policymakers and legislators of both parties. Former Director of the Federal Bureau of Prisons, Harley Lappin, testified to Congress that --inmates are particularly vulnerable to recruitment by terrorists,‖ and 
--we must guard against the spread of terrorism and extremist ideologies.‖ 
361. Report of the House Committee on Homeland Security, COMPILATION OF 
HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 157. A number of cases since 9/11 have involved terrorists who converted to Islam or were radicalized to Islamism in American prisons, then subsequently attempted to launch terror strikes in the United States upon their release from custody. These radicalized terrorists have also carried out activities overseas. In January 2010, Senator John Kerry, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, released a report that stated: --Three dozen U.S. citizens who converted to Islam while in prison have traveled to Yemen, possibly for 
al-Qaeda training.‖ 
362. C. Christine Fair, (Prof., Security Studies, Georgetown U.), PROTECTING THE 
HOMELAND AGAINST MUMBAI-STYLE ATTACKS AND THE THREAT FROM LASHKAR-E-TAIBA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearings, June 12, 2013, 17. While Islamist groups continue to pose an undeniable threat, it is also important to acknowledge the reality that groups of other ideologies and religious commitments also seek to commit violence in this country and have done so. Unfortunately, any terrorist organization can easily avail of the permissive environment to obtain any range of guns and munitions. In fact, it is surprising that terrorist organizations have not perpetrated a Mumbai-like attack given that the United States routinely experiences mass killings by lone shooters. 
363. C. Christine Fair, (Prof., Security Studies, Georgetown U.), PROTECTING THE 
HOMELAND AGAINST MUMBAI-STYLE ATTACKS AND THE THREAT FROM LASHKAR-E-TAIBA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearings, June 12, 2013, 22. It is important to balance what appears to be the perceived current threat with evolving near-term threats. Indeed, white supremacist, anti-Muslim, those who oppose even the most commonsensical of gun control and other bigoted organizations also threaten our society and have engaged in violence in recent years. The focus upon Islamist terrorist should not be at the expense of these other threats. 
364. C. Christine Fair, (Prof., Security Studies, Georgetown U.), PROTECTING THE 
HOMELAND AGAINST MUMBAI-STYLE ATTACKS AND THE THREAT FROM LASHKAR-E-TAIBA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearings, June 12, 2013, 22. It is only a matter of time before a terrorist organization - of any ideological or religious background - understands that it can easily terrorize Americans by perpetrating mass killings at soft targets using munitions that are easily and readily available. 
365. Bennie Thompson, (U.S. Represenative, Mississippi), ATTACKS ON THE 
HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 9, 2013, 80. By now, we should know that terrorist violence is not limited to any particular ideology or nation. As the Southern Poverty Law Center reported in March 2013, the number of conspiracy-minded, anti-government patriot groups on the American radical right reached an all-time high in 2012, the fourth consecutive year of growth. The Southern Poverty Law Center concludes that these groups will continue to grow and become more militant during President Obama's second term and due to the National debate on gun control measures. So it seems that if we are here to be proactive, we should take the lessons we have learned since September 11 and apply them to the evolving face of terror, both at home and abroad. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	49 
 
 
 
366. Randy Beers, (Acting Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland Security), THREATS TO THE HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 45. However, although we are concerned about the threat posed by al-Qa'ida or individuals inspired by al-Qa'ida, the threat posed by violent extremists is a broader threat not limited to a single ideology. Because the threat environment constantly evolves, DHS must consider all types of violent extremism, while ensuring we do not inappropriately focus upon individuals who may be engaging in legal, constitutionally-protected behavior, such as political speech. To this end, DHS focuses its attention on individuals who are inspired not merely by specific ideologies, but are inspired to violence and/or specific criminal activity as a means of furthering their ideological objectives. Many communities and rural counties nationwide face such threats. 

376. Paul Sperry, (Staff), INVESTOR'S BUSINESS DAILY, Feb. 18, 2015, 
A7. 
Obama suggested that the Paris massacre was a function of cultural alienation. Others 
tried to blame poverty or lack of education. We heard the same excuses after 9/11. But Los Angeles Times veteran Terry McDermott traveled to the Mideast to retrace the steps of most of the 9/11 hijackers. He dug into their backgrounds and found that none of them was criminally insane. Or poor. Or uneducated. Or alienated. In fact, McDermott discovered that the Saudi hijackers were among the "best boys" in their hometowns. They were "bright" and "respectful." But then they started memorizing the Quran and studying Islamic law, and before long they were signing up for holy war. 

                       377. 	Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
                       
367. Jonathan Schanzer, (Vice President, Foundation for Defense of Democracies), 
TERRORIST FINANCING SINCE 9/11: ASSESSING AN EVOLVING AL- QAEDA AND STATE SPONSORS OF TERRORISM, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 18, 2012, 8. Terrorists have adapted, in part, by hatching cheaper plots. It cost al-Qaeda of the Arabian Peninsula just $4,200 to place two bombs on cargo planes in October 2010. The group bragged openly of this, 
underscoring that it is nearly impossible to stop such low-cost operations. 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 61. Jihad is not caused by poverty, illiteracy or hostile environment. The famous columnist Fareed Zakaria comments: --Faisal Shahzad, the would-be terrorist of Times Square, seems to have followed a familiar path. Like many recruits to jihad, he was middle-class, educated, seemingly 
assimilated - and then something happened that radicalized him.‖ 

                       378. 	Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
                       
368. James Comey, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), THREATS TO THE 
HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 60. The Boston bombing also demonstrated the devastating potential of an improvised explosive device (IED) crafted from simple components, which could inspire other extremists to use such tactics. The devices used in Boston were similar in design to instructions widely available online. In addition to the Boston attack, over the past two years we have also seen extremists attempt to detonate IEDs or bombs at such high profile targets as the Federal Reserve Bank in New York, the U.S. Capitol, and commercial establishments in downtown Chicago, 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 57. Whether terrorists belong to a religion which is the largest, or the second largest and growing, or have had a glorious past, or are part of Abraham's family, there is no justification, rationale, or defense for cutting off someone's head. These brutal terrorists, misguided and deluded, are receiving undue compassion from Islamic cultural centers, public relations organizations, and intellectuals, because the root causes of terrorism have remained unaddressed, or are viewed as a result of injustices brought on by the West. 

Tampa, and Oakland. Fortunately, these attempts, as well as many other plots, were 	379. 	Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 

thwarted. Yet the threat remains. 
369. C. Michael Hurley, (Staff Member, 9/11 Commission), 9/11, TEN YEARS 
LATER, 2012, 134. What is the threat that we face today? The biggest threat to our national security in many ways still comes from affiliates of --core al-Qaeda.‖ Peter Bergen, in a report he coauthored a year ago for the Chair and Vice Chair of the 9/11 Commission, highlights the threat from al-Qaeda jihadists, calling it a --strategy of diversification, attacks mounted by a wide variety of perpetrators of different national and ethnic origins and backgrounds that cannot be easily profiled as threats. Peter Bergen's, latest book, The Longest War, is an insightful account of the last ten years and of the threat and challenges that we face today. 
370. Matthew Olsen, (Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), THREATS TO THE 
HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 69. Since early 2012, thousands of fighters from around the world - including the United States - have traveled to Syria to support oppositionists fighting against the Asad regime, and some have connected with extremist groups, including al-Nusrah Front. This raises concerns that capable individuals with extremist contacts and battlefield experience could return to their home countries to commit violence. 
371. Frederick Kagan, (Dir., Critical Threats Project, American Institute for Public 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, xv. Some of the more liberal Muslim intellectuals believe that the surge in the number of militants is a result of the colonization of Islamic lands, forcible modernization, and prevailing underdevelopment and illiteracy. But nothing - neither religious oppression, economic compulsion, humiliation, loss of empire, ethics, nor religious beliefs justifies the killing, kidnapping, and hijacking of innocent people. 
380. Bruce Hoffman, (Dir., Center for Peace and Security Studies, Georgetown U.), 
ATTACKS ON THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 9, 2013, 104. Finally, the continued absence of a successful, major al-Qaeda attack in North America since 2001 may induce a period of quiet and calm that lulls us into a state of false complacency, lowering our guard and, in turn, provoking al- Qaeda or one of its allies to chance a dramatically spectacular attack in the United States. 
381. Patrick Rahill, (JD Candidate), CLEVELAND STATE LAW REVIEW, 2014, 
241. In the wake of September 11, 2001, our nation has entered a new war, a --war on 
terror.‖ Unlike before, where the United States could achieve a relative peace through --conventional policies of deterrence and punishment,‖ the current enemy is --not a nation state against which the U.S. can retaliate.‖ This new enemy is one willing --to commit suicide for their cause,‖ and has the --potential to wreak large-scale havoc and 

Policy 	Research), 	IS 	AL-QAEDA 	WINNING? 	GRADING 	THE 	destruction‖ in a variety of ways. As our nation has seen, --there appears to be no 

ADMINISTRATION'S COUNTERTERRORISM POLICY, House Foreign Affairs 
Committee Hearing, Apr. 8, 2014, 51. The U.S. intelligence community has put the number of foreign fighters in Syria at around 7,000. What will happen when a lot of them start going home? The good news is that the al Qaeda of 2001 is gone; the bad news is that Son of al Qaeda is a lot more lethal. 
372. Seth Jones, (Associate Dir., International Security and Defense Policy Center), 
ASSESSING THE THREAT TO THE HOMELAND FROM AL-QAEDA OPERATIONS IN IRAN AND SYRIA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearings, May 22, 2013, 10. The escalating war in Syria presents a growing threat to the United States. Led by Jabhat al-Nusrah (the Victory Front), an al-Qaeda-affiliated group, Syria is becoming a consummate training ground for foreign fighters. 
373. Seth Jones, (Associate Dir., International Security and Defense Policy Center), 
ASSESSING THE THREAT TO THE HOMELAND FROM AL-QAEDA OPERATIONS IN IRAN AND SYRIA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearings, May 22, 2013, 10. Syria is attracting a growing cadre of foreign fighters from the West, who could potentially return home with the capability to conduct attacks against the United States and its allies. 
374. Seth Jones, (Associate Dir., International Security and Defense Policy Center), 
ASSESSING THE THREAT TO THE HOMELAND FROM AL-QAEDA OPERATIONS IN IRAN AND SYRIA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearings, May 22, 2013, 14. While the number of American citizens traveling to Syria appears to be limited, at least at the moment, the increase in Europeans with potential access to the United States - including through the Visa Waiver Program - presents a serious counterterrorism challenge. It is incumbent on the United States and its European allies to continue to identify the names of these foreign fighters (including variations in spelling and cover names), share intelligence, ensure they are on appropriate watch lists, monitor their activities, and capture them if they return to the West. 
375. Peter King, (U.S. Rep., New York), ASSESSING THE THREAT TO THE 
HOMELAND FROM AL-QAEDA OPERATIONS IN IRAN AND SYRIA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearings, May 22, 2013, 3. Europeans constitute as much as 10 percent of this al-Qaeda's affiliate strength. Canadians, Australians, and perhaps even Americans have gone to Syria to fight alongside - or even with - al- Qaeda. These foreign fighters will likely undergo further Islamist radicalization as they receive terror training and gain combat experience before returning home to the West. 
effective way to protect the nation by deterring or punishing the enemy.‖ 
Accordingly, in our objective to protect our nation, prevention of terrorist activities becomes all-important. 
382. Beau Barnes, (JD Candidate, Boston U. School of Law), BOSTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, Oct. 2012, 1630. Because domestic terrorism both emerges from and occurs within a country's borders, efforts to interdict potential terrorists at the border are fruitless, rendering useless the counterterrorism efforts of agencies such as Customs and Border Protection and the Transportation Security Administration. The lack of a need to cross borders also eliminates the utility of many immigration-related and passport-fraud investigations in counterterrorism efforts. Therefore, only domestic policy options - principally law enforcement - are available to counter this threat. 
383. Michael Ryan, (Sr. Vice President, Middle East Institute), DECODING AL- 
QAEDA'S STRATEGY: THE DEEP BATTLE AGAINST AMERICA, 2013, 264. Preventing large-scale terrorist attacks in the United States or elsewhere involves a combination of a successful close battle by police and intelligence agencies and a deep battle on the part of society as a whole. The noted terrorism expert Brian Michael Jenkins has concluded: --As long as America's psychological vulnerability is on display, Jihadists will find inspiration, and more recruitment and terrorism will 
occur.‖ 
384. C. Christine Fair, (Prof., Security Studies, Georgetown U.), PROTECTING THE 
HOMELAND AGAINST MUMBAI-STYLE ATTACKS AND THE THREAT FROM LASHKAR-E-TAIBA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearings, June 12, 2013, 21. Local sources of information have been found to be critical in preventing terrorist events in the United States. Erik J. Dahl studied 176 failed terrorist plots in the United States. He concluded that --precise intelligence needed to prevent attacks is not usually developed through the use of strategic-level tactics that get much of the public's attention . . . More typically, plots are disrupted as a result of tips from the public, informants inside home-grown cells, and long-term surveillance of suspects.‖ This suggests that the most important thing that U.S. agencies can do is --focus on local and domestic intelligence, and to figure out how to gather the necessary intelligence while still maintaining the proper balance between civil liberties and 
national security.‖ [ellipsis in original] 
385. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 206. There is little doubt, however, that the Internet is an indispensable tool in combating lone wolf terrorism. In some cases, Internet activity by lone wolves may be the only intelligence that the authorities have prior to an attack. Intercepting the e-mails of lone wolves who are in communication with radical extremists abroad, monitoring militant chat rooms and blogs, and uncovering online postings of the final manifestos by lone wolves, in which they basically announce their plans, are just some of the Internet preventive measures that can be taken. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	50 
 
 
 
386. Marc Goodman, (Former Agent with FBI and Interpol; now Prof., Law, Singularity University), FUTURE CRIMES, 2015, 29. Some counterterrorism experts have referred to the Internet as a "terrorist university," a place where terrorists can learn new techniques and skills to make them more effective in their attack methodologies. Widely available online are documents such as The Mujahideen Poisons Handbook, which contains various "recipes" for homemade poisons and poisonous gases. The six-hundred-page Encyclopedia of Jihad is also widely available online and includes chapters such as "How to Kill," "Explosive Devices," "Manufacturing Detonators," and "Assassination with Mines." In a striking example of how dangerous such online education can be, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, the terrorist suspect arrested for his role in the April 2013 Boston Marathon bombings, admitted to authorities he and his brother learned how to make the pressure-cooker bomb used in the attack after reading step-by-step instructions published in al-Qaeda's online 
magazine, Inspire, in an article titled "Make a Bomb in the Kitchen of Your Mom." 
387. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 257. Although we cannot obviously prevent every lone wolf terrorist incident from occurring, we can employ a creative mix of strategies that may help reduce the threat. State-of-the-art technology in the form of detection systems, biometrics, and Internet monitoring tools will play a key role in accomplishing this, as will good old-fashioned police and intelligence work, including an alert public that reports suspicious packages and individuals to the authorities. But living with terrorism and its aftereffects will continue to be an unfortunate fact of life in the twenty-first century, just as it has been for previous generations. 
388. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 236. It is worth noting that the Internet may provide lone wolves with a false sense of anonymity. The savvy terrorist groups are aware of this, but not so for most lone wolves. Many think that they can hide behind their keyboards and computer screens and become invulnerable to discovery. The more they use the Internet, the better our chances will be to prevent their attacks. 
389. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 235-236. One of the lessons learned regarding lone wolf terrorism is that most lone wolves love to talk through the Internet. Whether it is by announcing to the world, as Colleen LaRose did, that she was ready, willing, and able to commit terrorist acts or by posting manifestos outlining various extremist beliefs, as Anders Breivik did, the Internet gives us clues about who the lone wolves may be. In addition, the chat rooms they frequent and the online searches they conduct can all be potential pitfalls for the lone wolf, if their activity is uncovered by law enforcement. 
390. Joseph Lieberman, (Former U.S. Senator, Connecticut), ATTACKS ON THE 
HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 9, 2013, 13. FBI Director Mueller testified that same year at a hearing on the sixth anniversary of the 9/11 attacks that --al-Qaeda [was] also inspiring individuals with no formal links to the group. The threat of home-grown terrorists or extremists, acting in concert with other like-minded individuals, or as lone wolves, has become one of the gravest 
domestic threats we face.‖ 
391. Abdel Atwan (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 238. The Arab Spring highlighted the importance and efficiency of social networking for clandestine activity and logistics. Jihadis too routinely use Facebook, Twitter and text messaging for instant communication and sharing ideas. Never before has there been so much jihadi material in cyberspace spreading so far and so fast. 
392. Abdel Atwan (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 239. Through the ingenious use of the dark web (of which more below) and mirror sites, jihadis are able to keep information online even when the authorities attempt to remove it. Third- party file hosting services enable jihadis to evade national intelligence services by enabling them to upload and retrieve material completely anonymously. Blogs and the contributions of individuals to jihadi forums help to maintain the mythology and draw of jihad for the susceptible potential recruit, whether to the battlefield or to ‗lone wolf' terror. 
393. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 246. The next wave of terrorism will also see more groups use the al Qaeda model for exploiting the Internet for maximum benefit, including posting videos of terrorist attacks in order to attract recruits, encouraging forums and chat rooms to keep people engaged in the struggle, and calling for lone wolves to initiate their own operations. 
394. James Comey, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), THREATS TO THE 
HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 61. Since 9/11, JTTFs have been instrumental in breaking up cells like the --Portland Seven,‖ the Northern Virginia jihad group, and the Daniel Patrick Boyd cell in North Carolina. They've foiled attacks against military institutions and personnel in New Jersey, New York, Maryland, Washington, Texas, and Virginia. They have disrupted plots against government and civilian targets across the country including the al-Qa'ida plot against the New York City Subway in 2009. They have traced sources of terrorist funding, responded to anthrax and other suspected weapons of mass destruction threats, halted the use of fake IDs, and arrested subjects who possessed deadly weapons and explosives. 
395. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 209. Another early warning sign of potential lone wolf terrorism is the suspicious purchase of various materials that can be used in constructing bombs or other weapons. In addition to monitoring the online purchases of such material, it is also important that law-enforcement agencies be able to know who has made such purchases in person at various stores throughout the country. The FBI, therefore, has a program in place known as Operation Tripwire, which enlists the aid of businesses in identifying such individuals. 


396. Michael Leiter, (Former Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), COUNTERTERRORISM POLICIES AND PRIORITIES: ADDRESSING THE EVOLVING THREAT, Senate Foreign Relations Comm. Hearing, Mar. 20, 2013, 11. On the other hand, there is real value in public discussion of terrorism: it can build resilience in the population and it can lead to the tackling of tough public policy questions like targeted killings and domestic intelligence. With terrorism fatigue we run a real risk of not addressing these issues in a way that provides a lasting counterterrorism framework. In this regard I actually see the current discussion around the use of drones and the potential for updating the 2001 Authorization for the Use of Military Force as quite heartening signs. 
397. Lyle Fearnley, (Ph.D. Candidate, Medical Anthropology, U. California at 
Berkeley), BIOSECURITY INTERVENTIONS: GLOBAL HEALTH AND SECURITY IN QUESTION, 2012, 61. The effort to turn this strategy of security into a functional apparatus focused on an experimental technology known as syndromic surveillance. Local health departments developed the first syndromic surveillance systems in the mid-1990s to detect unexpected or unusual outbreaks of diseases. These innovative surveillance systems monitored nonspecific data sources - including emergency calls to 911, pharmaceutical sales, and emergency room (ER) triage counts - rather than physician or laboratory diagnoses. This nonspecificity provided health departments with possible early warning of outbreaks, even if the cause of illness was unknown. 
398. Michael Vickers, (U.S. Undersecretary of Defense for Intelligence), 9/11, TEN 
YEARS LATER, 2012, 73. Al Qa'ida remains a very dangerous threat to the American homeland and the vanguard of the global jihadist movement. That said, the group is under far more pressure, and is in a far more precarious position than it has been at any time since it was ejected from its Afghanistan safe haven in 2001. Al Qa'ida's senior leaders and rank and file feel besieged by U.S. counterterrorism operations. Its senior leaders are being eliminated at a rate far faster than al-Qa'ida can replace them, and the leadership replacements the group is able to field are much less experienced and credible. 
399. Charles Kurzman, (Prof., Sociology, U. of North Carolina), COMPILATION 
OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 138. The decline in prosecutions of Muslim Americans for support of terrorism over the past decade is particularly notable in view of the heightened scrutiny that terrorism financing now receives from law enforcement agencies, which --have established an increasingly difficult environment within which terrorist financiers can operate undetected,‖ and --have made the concealment and transfer of terrorism related funds more difficult,‖ according to Congressional testimony by the acting assistant director of the FBI's Counterterrorism Division. 
400. Michael Leiter, (Former Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), ATTACKS 
ON THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 9, 2013, 97. The concrete result of this work is a long list of disrupted plots that must be remembered: The 2011 arrest of Khalid Ali-M Aldawsari in Texas as he plotted to attack power plants, military targets, and others; the 2010 attempt to take down two U.S. cargo planes with bombs made in Yemen; Najibullah Zazi's 2009 attempt to attack the New York City subway; the 2008 arrest of Bryant Neal Vinas who homeland attacks with al-Qaeda in Pakistan; a 2007 plot to attack soldiers at Ft. Dix, New Jersey; and the 2006 Operation Overt that disrupted a plot to bomb numerous transatlantic airliners. Of course, these are but a sample of the much larger set of disrupted plots that have kept the American people and our allies far safer than they otherwise would have been. 
401. Abdel Atwan, (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 19. In addition to realised attacks, there were several thwarted attempts to commit atrocities in the West. On Christmas Day 2009, 23-year-old Umar Farouq Abdulmutullab tried to set off a bomb hidden in his underpants on board a flight bound for Detroit. In April 2012, the CIA foiled an identical plot involving a more sophisticated version of the underpants bomb - one that had no metal parts and would have passed unnoticed through airport security allowing the suicide bomber to board a US-bound flight of his choosing. Both bombs are believed to be the work of AQAP's Ibrahim Hassan al- 
Asiri, Al Qaeda's infamously ingenious ‗master bomb-maker.' 
402. Michael Vickers, (U.S. Undersecretary of Defense for Intelligence), 9/11, TEN 
YEARS LATER, 2012, 74. The group's losses in 2011 have been particularly devastating: most notably, of course, the group's founder and leader, Usama Bin Ladin, but also its General Manager and #2, Atiyah Abd al-Rahman, and two of its key external operations leaders, Ilyas Kashmiri and Younis al Mauritani. This year alone, core al Qa'ida has lost 8 of its --Top 20‖ leaders. Of the top nine leaders al Qa'ida had on September 11, 2001, only Ayman al-Zawahiri has thus far managed to escape death or detention. 
403. Joseph Lieberman, (Former U.S. Senator, Connecticut), A FALSE 
NARRATIVE ENDANGERS THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Jan. 15, 2014, 8. In the aftermath of the attacks of September 11, 2001, the overwhelming focus of our Government and of the American people was on the threat of terrorism. Twelve years later, that is no longer the case. Our loss of focus is in part a consequence of the success we have achieved - namely, the fact that we have not had another catastrophic attack on our homeland since that terrible Tuesday morning in September, 2001. The absence of such an attack, however, is not because of an absence of terrorist plots or plans against us. Rather, it has been the consequence of vigilance, determination, courage, and creativity by National security professionals and National leaders across two administrations, as well as the close cooperation and help of America's allies and partners around the world. It is also due to a series of sweeping National security reforms and innovations enacted in the aftermath of 9/11 that have made our Nation safer. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	51 
 
 
 
404. Kenneth Wainstein, (Attorney, Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft, LLP), FISA AMENDMENTS ACT OF 2008, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, May 31, 2012, 21. While many institutional and operational improvements have contributed to that progress over the past decade, none has been more instrumental than the overall enhancement in our intelligence capabilities. We can see the fruits of that effort regularly in the newspaper. Every successful strike against Al Qaeda leaders happens because we have sound intelligence telling us where and when we can find the targets. And, every plot prevention happens because we now have a developed network of surveillance capabilities, human assets and international partnerships that provides us an insight into our adversaries' planning and operations that we simply did not have before 9/11. 
405. Kenneth Wainstein, (Attorney, Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft, LLP), FISA 
AMENDMENTS ACT OF 2008, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, May 31, 2012, 22. A critical component of our counterterrorism effort - and, for that matter, any investigative effort - is the capability to intercept our adversaries' communications. From my earliest days as a prosecutor investigating narcotics networks here in the District of Columbia, I learned that electronic surveillance can be a tremendous source of intelligence about the inner workings of a conspiracy. That is particularly true in relation to foreign terrorist groups, where leaders and foot soldiers in different parts of the world have to rely on electronic communication for operational coordination. In recognition of this fact, much of our intelligence effort since 9/11 has focused on tapping into the communications streams of our terrorist adversaries. 
406. Michael Leiter, (Former Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), ATTACKS 
ON THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 9, 2013, 96-97. Before reflecting on five instances where our defenses weren't perfect, I must begin with the successes - because they are in truth far more prevalent than their more tragic counterparts. One cannot judge the extent of our success merely by considering casualties, but it is at least a starting point. In my view it is nothing short of remarkable that since the tragedy of 9/11, 18 people have been killed in the United States by al-Qaeda-inspired terrorists: Thirteen at Ft. Hood, one in Little Rock, Arkansas, and most recently four in Boston. Again, all of these deaths as well as those who were injured are tragic tales of loss to families and friends. Moreover, these attacks result in emotional and psychological scars for Americans far from the sites. As just noted, however, I firmly believe this relatively small toll is not just noteworthy but almost astounding. Yes it is 18 too many, but had I polled this committee's predecessors on September 12, 2001, as to what the toll of al-Qaeda might be over the subsequent 12 years, I am confident that the answers would have been in the hundreds, thousands, or perhaps even tens of thousands. The reason this has not been the case is not because al-Qaeda and its adherents have capitulated. Rather, it is solely because of counterterrorism offensive and defensive successes in the homeland and around the world. 
407. Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 61. Since 2001, there have been 11 foiled plans to blow up landmarks in New York City, including the Brooklyn Bridge and the New York Stock Exchange. Last autumn, the Afghani Najibullah Zazi, who grew up in 
New York, was alleged to be involved in a plot to blow up the New York subway. 
408. C. Michael Hurley, (Staff Member, 9/11 Commission), 9/11, TEN YEARS 
LATER, 2012, 139. The organizational capability of al-Qaeda today, says Zelikow, now seems to be back at the level it had in the mid-1990s. Its scattered fanatical adherents, though, have crystallized in some places. The most deadly recent attack on U.S. soil, as we have already discussed, was carried out by a solo fanatic, the Army psychologist inspired by Islamic propaganda to murder 13 people at Fort Hood. The danger of global Islamist terrorism is now fairly significantly reduced from what it was on 9/11. In Pakistan, it is probably true that the core - I emphasize the --core‖ al- Qaeda - is down to a few hundred reliable operatives. That is Dr. Zelikow's position as well. From the Shoe Bomber, Richard Reid, to the Christmas 2009 --underwear 


413. Matthew Aid, (Military Historian), INTEL WARS: THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE FIGHT AGAINST TERROR, 2012, 157. During the first ten months of 2009, the FBI successfully broke up plots by groups of homegrown terrorists who were planning attacks in Boston, Massachusetts; Dallas, Texas; Newburgh, New York; Raleigh, North Carolina; and Springfield, Illinois. 
414. Ronald Sievert, (Prof., Government, U. Texas), NATIONAL SECURITY LAW 
JOURNAL, 2014, 49. Many are not aware of the multiple elements of the continuous onslaught because, thankfully, luck, skill, and, in at least two cases, minor technical mistakes on the part of our adversaries prevented their success. The simultaneous destruction of twelve U.S. planes over the Atlantic in 2006 was averted with the discovery of the liquid explosives plot, planned attacks on John F. Kennedy International Airport and New Jersey oil terminals were uncovered early in 2007, Najibullah Zazi's plan to blow up the New York City subways was disrupted in 2009, Umar Farouk Abdulmuttalab's underwear bomb failed to detonate on a passenger- laden plane over Detroit that same year, and Faisal Shahzad's 2010 Times Square bomb fizzled after preliminary ignition. 
415. Bennie Thompson, (U.S. Rep., Mississippi), ASSESSING THE THREAT TO 
THE HOMELAND FROM AL-QAEDA OPERATIONS IN IRAN AND SYRIA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearings, May 22, 2013, 8. According to the National Counter-Terrorism Center's Worldwide Incidents Tracking System, from January 2004 to July 2008, 530 terrorist attacks were waged worldwide against mass transit and passenger rail targets, resulting in over 2,000 deaths and over 9,000 injuries. In the United States, a plot to attack the New York City subway system was thwarted in September 2009. The convicted conspirators stated they were directed by al-Qaeda. Thirty-four million rail and transit passenger trips are taken within the United States each weekday. 
416. Michael Schmidt, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, Mar. 26, 2015, A12. The F.B.I. 
has made great strides since the Sept. 11 attacks but urgently needs to improve its intelligence capabilities, hire more linguists and elevate the stature of its analysts to counter the rapidly evolving threats to the United States, according to a report released on Wednesday. The report by the F.B.I. 9/11 Review Commission said the bureau had prevented catastrophic terrorist attacks but needed to improve its ability to collect information from people and to efficiently analyze it, contending that the bureau lags ''behind marked advances in law enforcement capabilities.'' ''This imbalance needs urgently to be addressed to meet growing and increasingly complex national security threats, from adaptive and increasingly tech-savvy terrorists, more brazen computer hackers and more technically capable, global cyber syndicates,'' the report said. 
417. Jonathan Schanzer, (Vice President, Foundation for Defense of Democracies), 
TERRORIST FINANCING SINCE 9/11: ASSESSING AN EVOLVING AL- QAEDA AND STATE SPONSORS OF TERRORISM, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 18, 2012, 8. The 9/11 Commission report, released in 2004, gave Treasury high marks for its efforts. But in denying terrorists the use of the formal banking sector, we have driven terror finance underground, and we are now victims of our own success. 
418. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 9. The Board concludes that PRISM collection is clearly authorized by the statute and that, with respect to the --about‖ collection, which occurs in the upstream component of the program, the statute can permissibly be interpreted as allowing such collection as it is currently implemented. 
419. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE 
DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]

bomber‖ on the Northwest flight bound for Detroit, the risk of catastrophic terrorist 	tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. 	Broad 	surveillance 	of 

attack is significantly lower than on 9/11, but the risk is not zero. It is far from zero. 
409. Abdel Atwan (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 18. Attacks of the magnitude of 9/11, the March 2004 Madrid bombings or the July 2005 suicide attacks 
on London transport have been prevented by increased security and greater vigilance. 
410. Peter King, (U.S. Rep., New York), ASSESSING THE THREAT TO THE 
HOMELAND FROM AL-QAEDA OPERATIONS IN IRAN AND SYRIA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearings, May 22, 2013, 2. On May 9 American authorities arrested Ahmed Abassi, an associate of these men in the United States, who also supported al-Qaeda's Syrian affiliate. Now, had their terror plot succeeded, American and Canadian civilian casualties in New York could have been catastrophic. 
411. Kenneth Wainstein, (Attorney, Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft, LLP), FISA 
AMENDMENTS ACT OF 2008, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, May 31, 2012, 21. Since the attacks of September 11, 2001, we have been at war with Al Qaeda and its terrorist affiliates around the globe, and we're making great progress against them. We have significantly degraded their operational effectiveness with our strike against their leadership, and we have succeeded in preventing a number of recent attack attempts - the best example being the Yemeni bomb plot that was foiled just recently. 
412. Beau Barnes, (JD Candidate, Boston U. School of Law), BOSTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, Oct. 2012, 1615. Preventing terrorism is now the number one priority of both the Department of Justice and the FBI, and a top priority for state and local law enforcement agencies. In the past decade, as military and diplomatic efforts have contained the threat of international terrorism, attention has shifted to headline-grabbing "homegrown" terrorism. In the area of criminal law, this has resulted in the increased use of "material support" prosecutions, pretextual arrests for crimes unrelated to terrorism, conspiracy liability for inchoate terror plots, informants infiltrating Arab and Muslim communities, sting operations, and heightened physical and electronic surveillance. These tactics, while controversial, have been effective in disrupting numerous terror plots. 
communications is the least intrusive and most effective method for discovering 
terrorist and espionage activity. Many countries have expanded surveillance programs 
since the 9/11 attacks to detect and prevent terrorist activity, often in cooperation with 
other countries, including the United States. 
420. Brandon Bailey, (Staff, Mercury News), CONTRA COSTA TIMES, Feb. 3, 
2014. Retrieved Apr. 15, 2015 from Nexis. For the first time, Google, Facebook and other leading Internet companies issued reports Monday about previously secret U.S. government demands for their users' data, while renewing their call for reform of surveillance programs that have become a major source of friction between Silicon Valley and Washington, D.C. The companies said the government's demands under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act involved 59,000 or more Internet accounts in the first half of last year. Company officials said those numbers represent a small fraction of their hundreds of millions of users, and include many cases in which a single individual holds multiple accounts. 
421. Patricia Bellia, (Prof., Law, Notre Dame Law School), GEORGE 
WASHINGTON LAW REVIEW, Aug. 2004, 1377. In fact, the underlying surveillance statute, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (--FISA‖), deals not with foreign surveillance, but with domestic surveillance to acquire foreign intelligence information. 
422. Lothar Determann, (Prof., Law, U. California's Hastings College of Law). 
HASTINGS CONSTITUTIONAL LAW QUARTERLY, May 2014. Under U.S. law, the CIA is supposed to be focused on foreign intelligence gathering, whereas the FBI the Department of Homeland Security and law enforcement authorities are tasked with domestic security. Increasingly however, the concepts of --foreign‖ and --domestic‖ are both meaningless and impossible to separate within cyberspace and within our globalized economy and information society. The Internet was conceived to be borderless and global from the outset. An email sent to a neighbor across the street could be routed through foreign countries. Thus, any attempt to define or uphold geographical borders in Cyberspace are futile. U.S. citizens would not enjoy more privacy if the NSA moved its surveillance equipment abroad to honor the current statutory distinction between surveillance on domestic versus foreign territory. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	52 
 
 
 
423. Paul Rosenzweig, (Former Assistant Dir. for Policy, Dept. of Homeland Security), PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 50-51. Non-governmental oversight is equally robust. I'm not one who views Wikileaks as a beneficial development. But it would blink reality to deny its effectiveness as a check on governmental activity and to understand that the panoply of oversight ranges from the official to the informal. 
424. Paul Rosenzweig, (Former Assistant Dir. for Policy, Dept. of Homeland 
Security), PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 51. Beyond these external mechanisms, Greenwald gives no weight to the truly significant structural changes we have made in internal institutional oversight of surveillance activity. The Department of Homeland Security was created with a statutorily required Privacy Officer (and another Officer for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties), the first of its kind in American history. Now Privacy Officers proliferate in virtually every Federal agency. More recently, Congress created a Civil Liberties Protection Officer within the intelligence community. Inspectors General in the various agencies have been active in their constructive review, with the IG at the Department of Justice being particularly effective. 
425. Robert Litt, (General Counsel, Office of the Director of National Intelligence), 
IC ON THE RECORD, Mar. 17, 2014. Retrieved Feb. 8, 2015 from http://icontherecord.tumblr.com/post/79998577649/as-prepared-for-delivery-remarks- of- odni-general. In addition to Congressional oversight, there is oversight within the Executive Branch and from the judiciary. Within the Executive Branch, oversight of intelligence activities is conducted by Inspectors General, General Counsels, Privacy 
and Civil Liberties Officers, and the Department of Justice - and a culture of 
compliance is instilled in every intelligence officer. 
426. Craig Timberg, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, My 2, 2014, A1. The shifting 
industry practices force investigators to make difficult choices: withdraw data requests, allow notification to happen or go to magistrate judges to seek either gag orders or search warrants, which typically are issued under seal for a fixed period of time, delaying notification. Such choices were made even more difficult by the rising skepticism of magistrate judges, many of whom in recent years have scrutinized such requests more carefully or rejected them altogether, legal experts say. 
427. James Cole, (Deputy Attorney General of the United States), 
STRENGTHENING PRIVACY RIGHTS AND NATIONAL SECURITY: OVERSIGHT OF FISA SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2013, 49. First of all, both programs [Sections 215 and 702 of FISA] are conducted under public statutes passed and later reauthorized by Congress. Neither is a program that has been hidden away or off the books. In fact, all three branches of government play a significant role in the oversight of these programs. The Judiciary - through the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court - plays a role in authorizing the programs and overseeing compliance; the Executive Branch conducts extensive internal reviews to ensure compliance; and Congress passes the laws, oversees our implementation of those laws, and determines whether or not the current laws should be reauthorized and in what form. 
428. Diane Feinstein, (U.S. Senator, California), OVERSIGHT OF THE FEDERAL 
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, June 19, 2013, 14. We had a classified briefing - and I will say one thing about it - for 47 members and had the former chief judge of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court there to explain how the Court proceeds. I, as you do, believe that both these programs are legal, that they are carefully overseen. Senator Leahy mentioned the one that collects phone record data, not the names but the data, not the content but the data. Only 22 people have access to it, and it was queried approximately 300 times only this past year. 
429. Keith Alexander, (Dir., NSA), THE SURVEILLANCE TRANSPARENCY 
ACT OF 2013, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, Nov. 13, 2013, 98. It is important 
to remember that in order to target a U.S. person anywhere in the world under the FISA statute, we are required to obtain a court order based on a probable cause showing that the prospective target of the surveillance is a foreign power or agent of a foreign power. 
430. Joel Alexander, (Civil Liberties Protection Officer, U.S. Office of the Director 
of National Intelligence), DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE, 2015, 49. Many Americans probably don't know that there is a senior official whose job by law is to help ensure that civil liberties and privacy protections are built into intelligence programs. I am that official - the --Civil Liberties Protection Officer.‖ I engage with the director of national intelligence and other intelligence officials to oversee and guide intelligence activities. 
431. Margo Schlanger, (Prof., Law, U. Michigan), HARVARD NATIONAL 
SECURITY JOURNAL, 2015, 137. Four offices at the NSA address civil liberties and privacy issues: the Office of the Director of Compliance, the Civil Liberties and Privacy Office, the Office of the Inspector General, and the Office of General Counsel. All but the second are compliance offices; the new civil liberties office is a policy development shop. 
432. Margo Schlanger, (Prof., Law, U. Michigan), HARVARD NATIONAL 
SECURITY JOURNAL, 2015, 137. The NSA has a central compliance office, the Office of the Director of Compliance, whose current (and founding) head, John DeLong, reports to the NSA's director. The compliance office grew out of several serious compliance problems exposed to the FISA Court in 2009, and gained its statutory authority in 2010. It is assigned --responsib[ility] for the programs of compliance over mission activities.‖ Although the office is mentioned specifically only in some of the FISA minimization procedures, it seems to deal comprehensively not just with FISA-court supervised intelligence, but with all the procedures that are approved by the Attorney General under Executive Order 12,333 - which means all the NSA's collection activities, as well as the retention, analysis, and dissemination of any U.S. person information. 


433. Margo Schlanger, (Prof., Law, U. Michigan), HARVARD NATIONAL SECURITY JOURNAL, 2015, 139. The infrastructure that compliance staff use to accomplish this work is quite comprehensive. For example, under the applicable minimization rules, the NSA's systems used for FISA surveillance are built to create an audit trail. Database queries create a record that can later be reviewed to ensure that the person who provided the query had the right credentials and the required training, that the query itself met applicable rules, and so on. 
434. Margo Schlanger, (Prof., Law, U. Michigan), HARVARD NATIONAL 
SECURITY JOURNAL, 2015, 139. All NSA personnel are required to report any compliance mistakes or episodes of noncompliance with relevant court orders or other rules. These reports then are distributed to the compliance office, as well as to the NSA Office of General Counsel (OGC) and NSA Office of the Inspector General (OIG). 
435. Margo Schlanger, (Prof., Law, U. Michigan), HARVARD NATIONAL 
SECURITY JOURNAL, 2015, 140-141. Within a few weeks of the Snowden disclosures, the President announced that the NSA would --put in place a full-time civil liberties and privacy officer.‖ This particular bureaucratic structure is one that has developed over the past decade, during which several IC components and agencies that include such components - ODNI, CIA, DoD, DHS, DOJ, and others - have added Privacy and Civil Liberties Offices. Apparently the introduction of a civil liberties and privacy officer was not forced upon the NSA; officials there sponsored and embraced the idea. The job announcement went up in September 2013, and the new NSA Civil Liberties and Privacy Officer, Rebecca Richards, began work four months later. 
436. Margo Schlanger, (Prof., Law, U. Michigan), HARVARD NATIONAL 
SECURITY JOURNAL, 2015, 147. One key question about all this legal advice is whether it is ever constraining - whether the lawyers ever tell their clients no. NSA's lawyers do sometimes advise their clients/colleagues not to do specific things. One released training document, for example, advises analysts not to use certain search techniques, cautioning: --Do Not: Wildcard domains. Wildcard user names. Wildcard 
across domains.‖ 
437. James Sensenbrenner, (Chair, House Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and 
Homeland Security), FISA AMENDMENTS ACT OF 2008, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, May 31, 2012, 2. Foreign surveillance under the FISA Amendments Act is subject to extensive oversight by the Administration and Congress. Every 60 days, the Justice Department and the Director of National Intelligence conduct on-site reviews of surveillance conducted pursuant to the FISA Amendments Act. In addition, the Attorney General and the DNI conduct detailed assessments of compliance with Court-approved targeting and minimization procedures and provide these assessments to Congress twice a year. 
438. James Sensenbrenner, (Chair, House Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and 
Homeland Security), FISA AMENDMENTS ACT OF 2008, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, May 31, 2012, 4. The Administration is also now required to submit to the Judiciary and Intelligence Committees a copy of any FISA Court order, opinion, or decision and the accompanying pleadings, briefs, and other memoranda of law 
relating to a significant construction or interpretation of any provision of FISA. 
439. Stephen Schulhofer, (Prof., Law, Vanderbilt U. Law School), MORE 
ESSENTIAL THAN EVER: THE FOURTH AMENDMENT IN THE TWENTY- FIRST CENTURY, 2012, 158-159. The FISA Amendments Act of 2008 prohibits all foreign intelligence surveillance without a warrant if the target is inside the United States or if the person targeted, even outside the United States, is a U.S. citizen. And for surveillance of foreign nationals outside the United States, the 2008 amendments give Congress and the courts an important oversight role. 
440. Valerie Redmond, (JD Candidate), FORDHAM INTERNATIONAL LAW 
REVIEW, Apr. 2014, 748. Under the 2008 Amendments to FISA, Congress clarified the procedures for conducting surveillance on US citizens abroad. Prior to these amendments, Executive Order 12333 provided the only governance for surveillance of US citizens living outside of the United States. These amendments clarified that the US Government cannot conduct surveillance on a US citizen living outside of the United States without a warrant. Ultimately, the 2008 FISA amendments ensured that US citizens living in the United States and outside of the United States are protected from electronic surveillance conducted by the US Government. 
441. Joel Alexander, (Civil Liberties Protection Officer, U.S. Office of the Director 
of National Intelligence), DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE, 2015, 52. Congress also provides oversight, through the intelligence oversight committees, which were established specifically to provide a venue in which classified intelligence activities could be comprehensively discussed and reviewed. Both programs are regularly briefed to the congressional oversight committees. 
442. Joel Alexander, (Civil Liberties Protection Officer, U.S. Office of the Director 
of National Intelligence), DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE, 2015, 51. Under the Section 702 program, the government can only obtain foreign intelligence information as defined by law, using court-approved procedures to identify specific foreign intelligence targets outside the United States. This authority cannot be used to intentionally target United States persons or anyone inside the United States. 
443. Ellen Nakashima, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, Feb. 4, 2015, A2. Officials 
are also imposing a new restriction on searching for Americans' e-mails and phone calls collected without a warrant under what is often called the "Section 702" program under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. Now the NSA and the CIA must have a written statement of facts showing a query is reasonably likely to return foreign intelligence information before searching for a U.S. person's name, e-mail address or other identifier in data collected under the program. 
444. Ellen Nakashima, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, Feb. 4, 2015, A2. The 
administration also adopted a recommendation by the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, an independent executive branch watchdog, that information about an American acquired under Section 702 will not be used as evidence against that person in a criminal case unless the attorney general has consented and only in 
criminal cases with "national security implications or certain other serious crimes." 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	53 
 
 
 
445. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. If oversight is inadequate for the new political environment in the United States, it is completely lacking in the rest of the world. Most nations still take the traditional view that espionage is the prerogative of the sovereign and tell their legislatures and public nothing of what is being done in the name of security. This is as true for democracies (the United Kingdom being a notable exception) as it is for authoritarian states. 
446. Stewart Baker, (Attorney, Steptoe & Johnson, LLP), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 77. Practically every comparative study of law enforcement and security practice shows that the United States imposes more restriction on its agencies and protects its citizens' privacy rights from government surveillance more carefully than Europe. 
447. Stewart Baker, (Attorney, Steptoe & Johnson, LLP), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 77. One is from a study done by the Max Planck Institute, estimating the number of surveillance orders per 100,000 people in several countries. While the statistics in each are not exactly comparable, the chart published in that study shows an unmistakable overall trend. The number of U.S. orders is circled, because it's practically invisible next to most European nations; indeed, an Italian or Dutch citizen is more than a hundred times more likely to be wiretapped by his government than an American. 
448. Stewart Baker, (Attorney, Steptoe & Johnson, LLP), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 78. European regimes, by and large, offer far less protection against arbitrary collection of personal data - and expose their programs to far less public scrutiny. One recent study showed that, out of a dozen advanced democracies, only two - the United States and Japan - impose serious limits on what electronic data private companies can give to the government without legal process. In most other countries, and particularly in Europe, little or no process is required before a provider hands over information subscribers. 
449. Stewart Baker, (Attorney, Steptoe & Johnson, LLP), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 81. Unlike our section 215 program, the EU doesn't have a big metadata database. But that's because Europe doesn't need one. Instead, the European Parliament passed a measure forcing all of its information technology providers to create their own metadata databases so that law enforcement and security agencies could conveniently search up to two years' worth of logs. ‗these databases are full of data about American citizens, and under EU law any database held anywhere in Europe is open to search (and quite likely to --voluntary‖ disclosure) at the request of any government agency anywhere between Bulgaria and Portugal. 
450. Ronald Sievert, (Prof., Government, U. Texas), NATIONAL SECURITY LAW 
JOURNAL, 2014, 92. The events of September 11th of course shocked the United 
States. Yet it is only through skill and luck that we have managed to avoid repeated attacks of the kind endured by Europe in the twentieth century. Our intelligence agencies continue to labor under the legally unjustifiable probable cause standard established by the ill-conceived Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978. As 
shown above, probable cause and judicial review are not mandated by the rigorous standards of European Human Rights law or by U.S. Supreme Court decisions 
highlighting the requirement of reasonableness in Fourth Amendment searches. We 
must now ensure that we do not repeat past mistakes by overreacting to the Edward Snowden revelations of 2013. 
451. Bob Goodlatte, (Chair, House Committee on the Judiciary), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 3. The PRISM program derives its authority from Section 702 of the FAA. It involves the collection of foreign intelligence information about non-U.S. persons located outside the United States. To the extent the program captures information pertaining to U.S. citizens, such interception can only be incidental, and the handling of such information is governed by court-approved minimization procedures. 
452. Richard Clarke et al. (Chair, President's Review Group on Intelligence and 
Communications Technologies), LIBERTY AND SECURITY IN A CHANGING WORLD, Dec. 12, 2013, 164. So, too, there is a need for appropriate controls and oversight on intelligence collection to ensure that we act in ways that are both consistent with our values and reflective of our security requirements. To ascertain those requirements, the US Government has created a process known as the National Intelligence Priorities Framework (NIPF). While this process to produce intelligence priorities is the most robust ever used by the Intelligence Community, we believe that the NIPF system can and should be strengthened to ensure that what we seek to collect is truly needed and that our methods of collection are consistent with our values and policies. 
453. Nick Harper, (JD Candidate), UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO LAW REVIEW, 
2014, 1129. Acting on the Court's recommendation in Keith, FISA mandated the 
creation of two special courts to consider surveillance applications under the statute: the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) and the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review (FISCR). The chief justice of the Supreme Court appoints district and circuit court judges to sit on these courts for terms no longer than seven years. The government may not ask multiple FISC judges to review the same application; rather, it must appeal adverse decisions to the FISCR. Each FISA warrant application must meet several requirements. The application must identify the target of the surveillance and describe both the nature of the information sought and the type of communications or activities that would likely be subject to surveillance. The government also must propose procedures to minimize its use of the information sought and must certify that (1) the information sought is deemed to be foreign-intelligence information, (2) a --significant purpose of the surveillance is to obtain foreign intelligence information,‖ and (3) --such information cannot reasonably 
be obtained by normal investigative techniques.‖ 


454. Margo Schlanger, (Prof., Law, U. Michigan), HARVARD NATIONAL SECURITY JOURNAL, 2015, 163. In the portion of its operations that proceed under FISA, however, in many ways, the NSA lives with much more court oversight than do most federal agencies. Most federal agencies, after all, do not need before- the-fact court approval for routine operations. 
455. Margo Schlanger, (Prof., Law, U. Michigan), HARVARD NATIONAL 
SECURITY JOURNAL, 2015, 165. One-party process thus accommodates a back- and-forth in which the government gets several tries to alter - or, although Litt didn't say so, withdraw - its applications to avoid being turned down. Often, as Litt describes, the government is dealing not with a judge but with the FISA Court's handful of --legal advisors.‖ These are long-term lawyer assistants to the judges, who likely possess more influence than ordinary law clerks, because they are experienced attorneys with government backgrounds in surveillance law who serve for years at a time. They may therefore have more expertise than the judges themselves, particularly towards the start of the judges' seven-year terms. 
456. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 115-116. Second, to engage in traditional FISA or criminal electronic surveillance, the government must obtain approval from a judge, who independently assesses the legitimacy of the targeting and must be persuaded that the government's beliefs about the person and/or communications facility being targeted are supported by probable cause. By providing a neutral check on the government's authority to conduct electronic surveillance, these protections help assure innocent U.S. persons that their conversations will not be incidentally acquired in the course of improper surveillance directed at another person. These restrictions and checks are absent under Section 702. To be clear, such absence does not mean that the government has free rein: targeting rules, a system of intra- and inter-agency oversight, programmatic supervision by the FISA court, and a host of reporting requirements all work to ensure that the government's decisions about whom to monitor stay within legal bounds. 
457. Nick Harper, (JD Candidate), UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO LAW REVIEW, 
2014, 1130. FISA also requires a submission of facts that establishes probable cause 
that the target is a --foreign power or an agent of a foreign power.‖ Unlike in Title III, the target of surveillance need not be tied to a specific criminal offense. Instead, to satisfy probable cause, the government must show some linkage to a --foreign power‖ as outlined in the definitional section of the Act (known as the --targeting provisions‖). 
458. John Yoo, (Prof., Law, U. California at Berkeley Law School), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Summer 2014, 915. To be sure, there have been disagreements between the FISC and the NSA over how to implement the program in a manner consistent with Section 702. Examination of the FISC opinions made public, however, indicate that these contests involve minimization procedures where the NSA has intercepted a relatively small number of domestic communications or e-mails by U.S. persons. In October 2011, for example, the FISC criticized an NSA technique of collecting e-mails from --upstream‖ sources - that is, from the internet backbone itself rather than from ISPs - because it swept in several thousand domestic e-mails out of tens of millions of foreign e-mails. The FISC's opinion did not terminate the program but instead led the NSA to modify its minimization procedures so as to avoid collection of the domestic e-mails. One month later, the FISC approved the new minimization procedures, and the collection program continued. 
459. Casey McGowan, (JD Candidate), FORDHAM LAW REVIEW, Apr. 2014, 
2411. The FISC was established by 50 U.S.C. ß 1803 and consists of eleven district court judges from at least seven of the federal circuits, all of whom must reside within twenty miles of the District of Columbia. FISC judges are publicly designated by the chief justice of the United States. They have the power to --hear applications for and grant orders approving electronic surveillance anywhere within the United States,‖ but may not hear an application that was previously denied by another FISC judge. 
460. Ronald Sievert, (Prof., Government, U. Texas), NATIONAL SECURITY LAW 
JOURNAL, 2014, 75. In 2013, Reggie Walton, current FISA Court presiding judge, said that --the court alters numerous government requests for data collection or even refuses some of them, even though that may not be reflected in the final statistics that the court sends to Congress.‖ In the opinion of Judge Richard Posner, the positive statistics are a reflection of the fact that the government is actually far too conservative in seeking surveillance orders. He believes that in our legalistic culture the FBI tries to avoid violating the law and does not want to sail anywhere close to the wind. --The analogy is to a person who has never missed a plane in his life because he contrives always to arrive at the airport eight hours before the scheduled 
departure time.‖ 
461. Valerie Redmond, (JD Candidate), FORDHAM INTERNATIONAL LAW 
REVIEW, Apr. 2014, 752. When surveillance is conducted outside the United States and US citizens are not involved, then there are few restrictions on the NSA's surveillance activities. That said, any NSA effort to conduct electronic surveillance 
involving US citizens is subject to the strictures of FISA and Executive Order 12333. 
462. John Bates, (U.S. District Court Judge), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 201. During the three month period form July 1, 2013 through September 30, 2013, we have observed that 24.4% of matters submitted to the FISC ultimately involved substantive changes to the information provided by the government or to the authorities granted as a result of Court inquiry or action. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	54 
 
 
 
463. Nate Carlisle, (Staff), SALT LAKE TRIBUNE, Sept. 27, 2015. Retrieved Apr. 13, 2015 from Nexis. The Utah judge who spent seven years reviewing top-secret warrants to gather electronic data on terror suspects and ordinary Americans spoke about the experience publicly for the first time Thursday and assured an audience that the court and the laws it upholds are sound. U.S. District Court Judge Dee Benson said at his height on the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court he would review 70 or 80 warrant applications a week. Some were to access the contents of emails or other communications sent or received by specific individuals. Other times, the federal government sought broad swaths of metadata from communications companies, Benson told about 100 students, faculty and citizens at the Hinckley Institute of Politics on the University of Utah campus. The classified court is no rubber stamp, according to the judge. "I would say once a week, I would turn down an application," Benson said. Benson cited statistics showing the court approves 99 percent of warrant applications, but argued those numbers didn't count the requests the government withdraws after a judge rejects the application. Benson said he saw as many requests withdrawn as he rejected. 
464. G. Michael Fenner, (Prof., Law, Creighton U. School of Law), MONTANA 
LAWYER, Nov/Dec 2014, 15. A retired federal judge who is a friend of mine and was on FISC, said that the reason there are so few denials is this. Often the Court will tell the government that their warrant request is not sufficient and the government will take it back and investigate further and redo the request to make it sufficient. Sometimes that goes on multiple times with the same warrant-request, until the government meets the legal standard. Or until the government gives up and withdraws its request. That, he told me, is why there are not many judgments of denial. But there are many de facto denials. And, he said, the court is not a rubber stamp. 
465. Ira Rubenstein, (Senior Fellow at the Information Law Institute at New York 
University School of Law), CARDOZO ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT LAW JOURNAL, 2014, 827. There's been a significant effort by the FISA court to begin declassifying the FISA opinions, which used to be secret and unpublished. Another really interesting development is that the DNI - the Director of National Intelligence - now has a transparency website, which I recommend that you visit. It's quite interesting that this agency is now in the transparency business, and how they handle transparency is quite fascinating. 
466. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, REPORT ON THE 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM OPERATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 702 OF THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT, July 2, 2014, 50. Minimization is one of the most confusing terms in FISA. Like traditional FISA electronic surveillance and physical search, Section 702 requires that all acquired data be subject to --minimization procedures.‖ Minimization procedures are best understood as a set of controls on data to balance privacy and national security interests. Specifically, under FISA, minimization procedures must be --specific procedures . . . that are reasonably designed in light of the purpose and technique of the particular surveillance to minimize the acquisition and retention, and prohibit the dissemination, of nonpublicly available information concerning unconsenting United States persons consistent with the need of the United States to obtain, produce, and 
disseminate foreign intelligence information.‖ [ellipsis in original] 
467. Heidi Boghosian, (Dir., A.J. Muste Memorial Institute & Former Dir., National 
Lawyers Guild), SPYING ON DEMOCRACY: GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE, CORPORATE POWER, AND PUBLIC RESISTANCE, 2013, 272-273. Litigation by the American Civil Liberties Union, the Center for Constitutional Rights, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, the National Lawyers Guild, the Partnership for Civil Justice Fund in Washington, D.C., the People's Law Office in Chicago, and other organizations exposes and challenges, government policies that infringe on First and Fourth Amendment rights. In the case of surveillance, these organizations go a long way toward holding federal intelligence agencies accountable and reminding the judiciary and legislators that they have not kept pace with technology that changes day to day. The very act of bringing litigation serves an important function in drawing attention to injustices and educating the public about issues that impact their privacy. 
468. Heidi Boghosian, (Dir., A.J. Muste Memorial Institute & Former Dir., National 
Lawyers Guild), SPYING ON DEMOCRACY: GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE, CORPORATE POWER, AND PUBLIC RESISTANCE, 2013, 181. In the United States, most jurisdictions protect journalists' right to keep the identities of their sources confidential by means of statutes referred to as shield laws. Thirty-nine states and the District of Columbia have shield laws affording journalists some form of privilege against being compelled to produce confidential or unpublished information. The laws generally establish greater protection to journalists than do the state or federal constitutions. 
469. Charlie Savage, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, Feb. 22, 2014, A14. Attorney 
General Eric H. Holder Jr., who drew fire last spring over the Justice Department's aggressive tactics for secretly obtaining reporters' phone logs and emails as part of leak investigations, on Friday signed new guidelines narrowing the circumstances in which law enforcement officials may obtain journalists' records. 
470. Bob Goodlatte, (Chair, House Committee on the Judiciary), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 2. Unlike grand jury or administrative subpoenas in criminal investigations, which can simply be issued by a prosecutor, a FISA business records order must first be approved by a Federal judge. Similar to grand jury or administrative subpoenas, a FISA business record order cannot be used to search a person's home, to acquire the content of emails, or listen to telephone calls. It can only be used to obtain third-party records. 
471. David Sanger, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, June 7, 2014, A1. As fast as it can, 
Google is sealing up cracks in its systems that Edward J. Snowden revealed the N.S.A. had brilliantly exploited. It is encrypting more data as it moves among its servers and helping customers encode their own emails. Facebook, Microsoft and Yahoo are taking similar steps. After years of cooperating with the government, the immediate goal now is to thwart Washington - as well as Beijing and Moscow. 


472. David Sanger, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, June 7, 2014, A1. Worried that such an episode undercuts confidence in its wares, Microsoft is now fully encrypting all its products, including Hotmail and Outlook.com, by the end of this year with 2,048-bit encryption, a stronger protection that would take a government far longer to crack. The software is protected by encryption both when it is in data centers and when data is being sent over the Internet, said Bradford L. Smith, the company's general counsel. 
473. David Sanger, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, June 7, 2014, A1. Facebook and 
Yahoo have also been encrypting traffic among their internal servers. And Facebook, Google and Microsoft have been moving to more strongly encrypt consumer traffic with so-called Perfect Forward Secrecy, specifically devised to make it more labor intensive for the N.S.A. or anyone to read stored encrypted communications. 
474. David Sanger, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, June 7, 2014, A1. The latest move 
in the war between intelligence agencies and technology companies arrived this week, in the form of a new Google encryption tool. The company released a user- friendly, email encryption method to replace the clunky and often mistake-prone encryption schemes the N.S.A. has readily exploited. 
475. Peter Swire, (Prof., Law, Ohio State U. College of Law), COLUMBIA 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, Spr. 2012, 453. As society becomes increasingly interconnected, cryptography facilitates the preservation of security and privacy in everyday life. Encryption is not merely used to protect communications or stored data. This is a commonly held misperception, which understates the prevalence of encryption in everyday life. In fact, encryption is the norm, not the exception, and is used in innumerable ways--from protecting critical public infrastructure and sensitive personal information, to securing communications and commercial transactions. Cryptographer Matt Blaze sums up the current state of encryption today in this way: --The transparent use of cryptography by everyday 
people (and criminals) has, in fact, exploded.‖ 
476. Peter Swire, (Prof., Law, Ohio State U. College of Law), COLUMBIA 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, Spr. 2012, 453. As described in the example above, encryption is used in the background of most transactions, with the user blithely unaware of its presence. One widely deployed encryption system is SSL, or Secure Sockets Layer. SSL is a protocol that establishes a secure session link between a website and a user's web browser. All communications and data sent through this link are secured with a cryptographic hash, using digital certificates. SSL is widely used for online shopping and banking, and also to protect many emails globally that use webmail systems. HTTPS is an SSL application that is integrated into most web browsers and provides protection for information transmitted to SSL- enabled web servers. 
477. Peter Swire, (Prof., Law, Ohio State U. College of Law), COLUMBIA 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, Spr. 2012, 456. Cryptography is quite possibly the single most important security tool for defenders. It applies to major categories of vulnerability -- data in motion, data at rest, and authentication. With data in motion, encryption is a powerful tool for protecting communications against attacks from all sources. Similarly, for data at rest, encryption protects files residing inside an individual's or organization's computer system. Penetration of the system by an attacker typically does not compromise the encrypted files. In addition, 
cryptography is built into the essential function of authentication over the Internet. 
478. Margo Schlanger, (Prof., Law, U. Michigan), HARVARD NATIONAL 
SECURITY JOURNAL, 2015, 182. In addition to directing the development of policies to give foreigners some of the same protections already available to U.S. persons, PPD-28 includes some new civil liberties - and even civil rights - protective language: --Privacy and civil liberties shall be integral considerations in the planning of U.S. signals intelligence activities. The United States shall not collect signals intelligence for the purpose of suppressing or burdening criticism or dissent, or for disadvantaging persons based on their ethnicity, race, gender, sexual orientation, or 
religion.‖ 
479. Fred Kaplan, (Fellow, Council on Foreign Relations), SALT LAKE TRIBUNE, 
Jan. 20, 2014. Retrieved Apr. 20, 2015 from Nexis. Obama also released a new presidential policy directive, PPD-28, which explicitly prohibits the NSA from using its surveillance technologies to track down domestic political critics - a good thing to make clear, although Executive Order 12333, signed in 1981 by President Reagan, put broad restrictions on the NSA's domestic activities (which certainly included forbidding the surveillance of domestic dissidents). 
480. John Bates, (U.S. District Court Judge), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 206. Currently, the Chief Justice selects eleven district court judges to serve on the FISC for staggered terms not to exceed seven years. In order to ensure that judges bring to the FISC experiences and practices developed around the country, these judges must represent at least seven of the judicial circuits. At least three of the FISC judges must reside within 20 miles of Washington, D,C., so that a judge will be continuously available to entertain urgent matters. The Chief Justice also selects three district court or circuit court judges to serve on the Court of Review for terms not to exceed seven years. 
481. John Bates, (U.S. District Court Judge), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 206. For the Courts to operate effectively, prolonged vacancies must be avoided. Maintaining a full complement of judges will become even more imperative if other legislative changes result in a heavier workload for the Courts. We are concerned that a selection process that involves more persons and especially one that is likely to introduce political factors - would result in vacancies detrimental to Court operations and possibly to national security. 
482. John Bates, (U.S. District Court Judge), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 196. It is important that the process for selection of FISC and Court of Review judges remain both expeditious and fully confidential; the Chief Justice is uniquely positioned to select qualified judges for those Courts. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	55 
 
 
 
483. John Bates, (U.S. District Court Judge), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 197-198. The authorizations sought in the large majority of cases do not implicate the privacy interests of many U.S. persons because the collections at issue are narrowly targeted at particular individuals or entities that have been found to satisfy the applicable legal standards. Nor, except in a small handful of cases, do such matters present novel or complex legal or technical issues. Accordingly, as the President's Review Group on Intelligence and Communications Technologies (--Review Group‖) has recognized, most FISA cases are similar to law enforcement applications for search warrants and Title III wiretaps, which also are considered ex parte. Providing for an advocate in the large majority of cases, then, would be superfluous and would create the unusual situation in our judicial system of affording, at this stage of the proceedings, greater procedural protections for suspected foreign agents and international terrorists than for ordinary U.S. citizens in criminal investigations. 
484. Margo Schlanger, (Prof., Law, U. Michigan), HARVARD NATIONAL 
SECURITY JOURNAL, 2015, 202-203. Judge Bates, who served for six years as a FISA Court judge, has written several letters to Congress, purportedly on behalf of the judiciary, opposing a full-time, autonomous special advocate in the FISA Court. Those letters pointed out, as a disadvantage, that inclusion of adversarial process would make the FISA Court more court-like. Judge Bates explained that --FISC judges currently have substantial flexibility in deciding how best to receive from the government information they consider relevant to a particular case.‖ That flexibility, he suggested, could not survive inter partes procedural requirements: --In order for the FISC to abide by the procedural and ethical requirements that apply in adversarial proceedings, and for the advocate to appear on equal footing with the applicant, the FISC would have to ensure that the advocate was involved in all such interactions in any case in which the advocate may participate. . . .We expect that the logistical challenges of administering such a three-way process for more than a handful of 
cases would be considerable.‖ [ellipsis in original] 
485. John Bates, (U.S. District Court Judge), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 198. Indeed, we are concerned that proposals to create a full-time advocate with the discretion to participate, or seek leave to participate, in any or all cases would impair rather than improve the FISC's ability to receive information and rule on applications in an effective and timely manner. 
486. John Bates, (U.S. District Court Judge), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 200. If the advocate and an applicant have a dispute about what information the advocate should receive, then the FISC may be required to resolve collateral, discovery-type issues, which would place new forms of demands on the resources of 
the Court and create the potential for delays that would impact national security. 
487. John Bates, (U.S. District Court Judge), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 201. In short, the burdens and complications arising from a full-time advocate who could elect to participate (or seek leave to participate) in fact-intensive, run-of- the-mill cases, weighed against the negligible benefits from involving an independent advocate in consideration of those cases, strongly counsel against creation of such a position. 
488. John Bates, (U.S. District Court Judge), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 201. As noted above, the advocate would rarely, if ever, serve as a separate source of factual information. Instead, intelligence agencies may become reluctant to voluntarily provide to the Court highly sensitive information, or information detrimental to a ease, because doing so would also disclose that information to a permanent bureaucratic adversary. This reluctance could diminish the Court's ability to receive relevant information, thereby undermining the quality of its decisions. In some cases, that reluctance could result in those agencies' opting not to pursue potentially valuable intelligence-gathering operations governed by FISA in order to protect extremely sensitive intelligence methods or targets from disclosure to that 
adversary! 
489. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), THE SURVEILLANCE 
TRANSPARENCY ACT OF 2013, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, Nov. 13, 2013, 61. Allowing some form of surveillance is vital to assure the protection of American interests. Conversely, allowing full public disclosure of our sources and methods is dangerous - identifying publicly how we conduct surveillance risks use of that information by terrorists and, in turn, draws a roadmap of which threats are not known. Thus, complete transparency will defeat the very purpose of disclosure and may even make us less secure. 
490. Robert Litt, (General Counsel, U.S. Office of National Intelligence), THE 
SURVEILLANCE TRANSPARENCY ACT OF 2013, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, Nov. 13, 2013, 42. But the basic point is straightforward: disclosing information in a manner that would permit our adversaries to deduce our specific collection capabilities and shortcomings would harm national security by allowing those adversaries to switch providers and services in order to avoid our surveillance. Already, our Intelligence Community knows that our adversaries purposely gather such information to assess our capabilities and evade surveillance. Providing them the information on our collection capabilities that they are working so hard to gather could significantly and irreparably harm our intelligence collection efforts. So, while we fully support nationwide, aggregate disclosure in the interests of transparency, as well as certain generic company-level reporting, we are concerned that the bill's provisions requiring more detailed company-specific disclosure would pose a risk to national security. 
491. John Bates, (U.S. District Court Judge), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 196. In many cases, public disclosure of Court decisions is not likely to enhance the public's understanding of FISA implementation if the discussion of classified information within those opinions is withheld. Releasing freestanding 
summaries of Court opinions is likely to promote confusion and misunderstanding. 


492. John Bates, (U.S. District Court Judge), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 208. The government may often believe it necessary to withhold from the public details about how a surveillance is conducted, so that valid intelligence targets are not given a lesson in how to evade it. But a redacted opinion that does not contain this factual information may merely recite statutory provisions or provide a partial discussion of how those provisions were applied, without the factual context necessary to understand the opinion's reasoning and result. In such cases, partial releases of opinions run the risk of distorting, rather than illuminating, the reasoning and result of Court opinions. That risk is probably even greater for summaries of opinions that are offered as public substitutes for withheld opinions, rather than as guides to opinions that are published. 
493. Robert Litt, (Dir., U.S. Office of National Intelligence), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 9. And I want to quote here from Judge Walton, who is now chief judge of the FISA court, who said in a letter to the Senate Intelligence Committee. --Most FISC opinions rest heavily on the facts presented in the particular matter before the court. Thus, in most cases, the facts and legal analysis are so inextricably intertwined that excising the classified information from the FISC's 
analysis would result in a remnant void of much or any useful meaning.‖ 
494. Robert Litt, (General Counsel, U.S. Office of National Intelligence), THE 
SURVEILLANCE TRANSPARENCY ACT OF 2013, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, Nov. 13, 2013, 40-41. Moreover, attempting to identify the numbers of persons or U.S. persons whose communications or information may be incidentally collected would, in practice, have a privacy-diminishing effect directly contrary to the aims of this bill. Attempting to make this determination would require the Intelligence Community to research and review personally identifying information solely for the purpose of complying with the reporting requirements, even if the information has not been determined to contain foreign intelligence. Such an effort would conflict with our efforts to protect privacy. 
495. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), THE SURVEILLANCE 
TRANSPARENCY ACT OF 2013, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, Nov. 13, 2013,61. Yet Madison understood that transparency was not a supreme value that trumped all other concerns. He also participated in the U.S. Constitutional Convention of 1787, the secrecy of whose proceedings was the key to its success. While governments may hide behind closed doors, U.S. democracy was also born behind them. It is not enough, then, to reflexively call for more transparency in all circumstances. The right amount is debatable, even for those, like Madison, who understand its utility. 
496. Robert Litt, (Dir., U.S. Office of National Intelligence), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 9. Of course, as you know, we do provide copies of all significant opinions of the FISC to the Judiciary and the Intelligence Committees of both houses. And I can tell you that in light of the recent disclosures, we are redoubling our efforts to try to provide meaningful public insight into the rulings of the FISA court, again to the extent we can do that consistent with the need to protect our intelligence activities. 
497. John Bates, (U.S. District Court Judge), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 207. The Judicial Branch is committed to making court opinions available to the public unless there is a compelling need for secrecy. The FISC regularly makes 
publicly available those of its opinions that do not contain classified information. 
498. John Bates, (U.S. District Court Judge), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 199. Judges appointed to the FISC, retain all their regular responsibilities for civil and criminal cases assigned to them in their respective districts. Each week, one of those judges is on duty for the FISC in Washington, D.C. Eight of the eleven judges do not reside in the Washington, D.C. area and must travel from their home districts in order to serve as the duty judge, The duty week assignment rotates among the judges, so that each judge takes one week every few months away from district court responsibilities to do FISC work. This rotation system avoids serious disruption to the work of any one district when a judge serves on the FISC. 
499. Ellen Nakashima, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, Jan. 15, 2014, A3. The 
review group also proposed that national security letters be issued only by the surveillance court when there are "reasonable grounds to believe" that the data sought are relevant to an authorized terrorism or espionage investigation. Currently, the letters may be issued by senior FBI officials in field offices. The FBI issues more than 20,000 of the letters each year for data such as phone subscriber information and telephone toll records, as well as banking and credit-card records. The data do not include phone-call content, which would require a court-approved warrant. Bates said in his letter that requiring the court to authorize the letters would increase its workload dramatically. He expressed skepticism that the review group's suggestion of expanding the number of surveillance court judges was workable. 
500. John Yoo, (Prof., Law, U. California at Berkeley Law School), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Summer 2014, 904. A warrant requirement for national security searches would reduce the flexibility of the executive branch, which possesses --unparalleled expertise to make the decision whether to conduct foreign intelligence surveillance‖ and is --constitutionally designated as the pre-eminent authority in foreign affairs.‖ A warrant requirement would place national security decisions in the hands of the judiciary, which --is largely inexperienced in making the delicate and complex decisions that lie behind 
foreign intelligence surveillance.‖ 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	56 
 
 
 
501. Steven Titch, (Associate Fellow, R Street Institute), HAS NSA POISONED THE CLOUD?, Jan. 2014, 2. The weight and scope of the NSA programs has sparked heated debate over their legality and constitutionality. Last year closed with two conflicting court decisions on the constitutionality of the PRISM program. On Dec. 16, 2013 in Washington D.C., Federal District Court Richard J. Leon ruled that the NSA's systematic recordkeeping of all Americans' phone calls most likely violated the Constitution. He ordered the government to stop collecting data on two plaintiffs' personal calls and to destroy the records of their calling history. Eleven days later, however, a federal judge in New York, William H. Pauley III, ruled the same data collection legal, setting up an eventual appellate court battle. 
502. Stewart Baker, (Attorney, Steptoe & Johnson, LLP), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 72. I know it's fashionable to say, --But what if I don't trust the government to follow the rules? Isn't it dangerous to let it collect all that data?‖ The answer is that the risk of rule-breaking is pretty much the same whether the collection comes first or second, either way, you have to count on the government to tell the truth to the court, and you have to count on the court to apply the rules. If you don't trust them to do that, then neither model offers much protection against abuses. 
503. Peter Baker, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, Jan. 18, 2014. Retrieved Apr. 14, 
2015 from Nexis. When the first of Mr. Snowden's revelations came out last year, Mr. Obama seemed surprised at the public reaction. ''If people can't trust not only the executive branch but also don't trust Congress and don't trust federal judges to make sure that we're abiding by the Constitution, due process and rule of law, then we're going to have some problems here,'' he said last June. 
504. Jeffrey Brand, (Dean, Center for Law and Global Justice, San Francisco School 
of Law), HARVARD NATIONAL SECURITY JOURNAL, 2015, 20. Post-9/11 history also included a willingness on the part of the Bush Administration to ignore FISA completely if it believed national security so demanded - a tack it took with the institution of the 2002 Terrorist Surveillance Program (TSP) that completely side- stepped FISA. The program was revealed by the New York Times in 2005, and the Bush Administration was forced to admit that TSP violated existing surveillance statutes. 
505. Valerie Redmond, (JD Candidate), FORDHAM INTERNATIONAL LAW 
REVIEW, Apr. 2014, 772. Any attempt to completely eradicate secret surveillance agencies would be significantly challenging. It is exceptionally difficult to eliminate a program whose existence is unknown. 
506. David Brin, (Ph.D., Physics, U. California, San Diego), DOMESTIC 
SURVEILLANCE, 2015, 71. It is fallacious to base our freedom and safety upon blinding elites. First, can you name one time in human annals when that actually happened? When those on top forsook any powers of vision? Forbid, and you'll drive it underground, as happened when the --Total Information Awareness‖ program scurried away from public attention, finding darker corners in which to grow. As author Robert Heinlein said, the chief effect of a privacy law is to --make the (spy) 
bugs smaller.‖ 
507. Ivan Greenberg, (Ph.D., History, City U. of New York), SURVEILLANCE IN 
AMERICA: CRITICAL ANALYSIS OF THE FBI, 1920 TO THE PRESENT, 2012, 275-276. Public opposition to the Pentagon's Total Information Awareness (TIA) program led Bush to cancel it. TIA would use advanced data-mining technology to establish a centralized database on Americans. Undersecretary of Defense Peter Aldridge described its goal to discover --connections between transactions‖ - surveying phone records, passports, drivers' licenses, credit cards, airline tickets, rental cars, gun purchases, chemical purchases, and criminal records. However, the Bush administration secretly put TIA into practice under other names and jurisdictions in subsequent years. 
508. Eric Schmidt & Jared Cohen, (Executive Chairman of Google/ Member of the 
National Counterterrorism Center's Advisory Board), THE NEW DIGITAL AGE: TRANSFORMING NATIONS, BUSINESSES AND OUR LIVES, 2014, 175. As details of the TIA program leaked out to the public, a range of vocal critics emerged from both the right and the left, warning about the potential costs to civil liberties, privacy and long-term security. They zeroed in on the possibilities of abuse of such a massive information system, branding the program --Orwellian‖ in scope. Eventually, a congressional campaign to shut TIA down resulted in a provision to deny all funds for the program in the Senate's 2004 defense appropriations bill. The Information Awareness Office was shuttered permanently, though some of its projects later found shelter in other intelligence agencies in the government's sprawling homeland- security sector. 
509. Eric Schmidt & Jared Cohen, (Executive Chairman of Google/ Member of the 
National Counterterrorism Center's Advisory Board), THE NEW DIGITAL AGE: TRANSFORMING NATIONS, BUSINESSES AND OUR LIVES, 2014, 175. In the early 2000s, following the September 11 terrorist attacks, something similar was proposed in the United States. The Defense Department set up the Information Awareness Office and green-lit the development of a program called Total Information Awareness (TIA). Pitched as the ultimate security apparatus to detect terrorist activity, TIA was designed and funded to aggregate all --transactional‖ data - including bank records, credit-card purchases and medical records - along with other bits of personal information to create a centralized and searchable index for law enforcement and counterterrorist agencies. Sophisticated data-mining technologies would be built to detect patterns and associations, and the --signatures‖ that dangerous people left behind would reveal them in time to prevent another attack. 
510. Axel Ambak, (Research Affiliate, Harvard University's Berkman Center), 
LOOPHOLES FOR CIRCUMVENTING THE CONSTITUTION, June 27, 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://www.ivir.nl/publicaties/download/1375. We [HYPERLINK: http://www.ivir.nl/publicaties/download/1375] have just argued the that collection of US person's network traffic from abroad presents a major loophole that can be exploited to circumvent legal safeguards protecting Americans and oversight mechanisms in other branches of Government. Put differently, the current regulatory framework for network surveillance by intelligence agencies creates incentives for conducting surveillance on foreign soil, regardless of whether it actually affects American communications or not. 

511. Axel Ambak, (Research Affiliate, Harvard University's Berkman Center), 
LOOPHOLES FOR CIRCUMVENTING THE CONSTITUTION, June 27, 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://www.ivir.nl/publicaties/download/1375. The  [HYPERLINK: http://www.ivir.nl/publicaties/download/1375]Internet was not designed around geopolitical borders; instead, its design reflects a focus on providing robust and reliable communications while, at the same time, minimizing cost. For this reason, network traffic between two endpoints located on US soil can sometimes be routed outside the US. 
512. Axel Ambak, (Research Affiliate, Harvard University's Berkman Center), 
LOOPHOLES FOR CIRCUMVENTING THE CONSTITUTION, June 27, 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://www.ivir.nl/publicaties/download/1375. A  [HYPERLINK: http://www.ivir.nl/publicaties/download/1375]network owned by a single organization (even an organization that is nominally --based‖ in the U.S. such as Yahoo! or Google) can be physically located in multiple jurisdictions. The revealed MUSCULAR/TURMOIL program illustrates how the N.S.A. exploited this by presuming authority under EO 12333 to acquire traffic between Google and Yahoo! servers located on foreign territory, collecting up to 180 million user records per month, regardless of nationality. Yahoo! and Google replicate data across multiple servers that periodically send data to each other, likely for the purpose of backup and synchronization. These servers are located in geographically diverse locations, likely to prevent valuable data from being lost in case of failures or errors in one location. The MUSCULAR/TURMOIL program collects the traffic sent between these servers: while this traffic can traverse multiple jurisdictions, it remains with the logical boundaries of the internal networks of Yahoo! and Google. Thus, we already have one example where loopholes under the legal regime of EO 12333 were exploited in the intradomain, i.e., within the logical boundaries of a network owned by a single organization. 
513. Axel Ambak, (Research Affiliate, Harvard University's Berkman Center), 
LOOPHOLES FOR CIRCUMVENTING THE CONSTITUTION, June 27, 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://www.ivir.nl/publicaties/download/1375. In  [HYPERLINK: http://www.ivir.nl/publicaties/download/1375]addition to situations where Americans' traffic is naturally routed abroad, the Internet's core protocols - BGP and DNS - can be deliberately manipulated to force traffic originating and terminating in an American network to be routed abroad. As we discussed earlier, deliberately manipulating Internet protocols for subsequent data collection from abroad, even when the manipulation was performed from within the U.S., does not fall under the legal definition for ‗electronic surveillance' in FISA; instead, these manipulations are regulated under the most permissive third legal regime for network surveillance, EO 12333 (and perhaps further specified in non- public guidelines). 
514. Axel Ambak, (Research Affiliate, Harvard University's Berkman Center), 
LOOPHOLES FOR CIRCUMVENTING THE CONSTITUTION, June 27, 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://www.ivir.nl/publicaties/download/1375. The  [HYPERLINK: http://www.ivir.nl/publicaties/download/1375]legal loopholes we identified are exploitable, since the vagaries of Internet protocols can sometimes cause traffic sent between two US endpoints to be routed abroad. Even when this is not the case, core Internet protocols like BGP and DNS can be deliberately manipulated to ensure that traffic between US endpoints takes an unusual path through a device located abroad. If the two main criteria are met, these interdependent legal and technical loopholes enable largely-unrestrained surveillance on Americans communications. For instance, these techniques can be used to collect, in bulk, all communications sent from an autonomous system like Boston University to a given IP address block (with a BGP manipulation), or from an autonomous 
system to a particular domain like www.facebook.com (with [HYPERLINK: http://www.facebook.com/] a DNS manipulation). 
515. Axel Ambak, (Research Affiliate, Harvard University's Berkman Center), 
LOOPHOLES FOR CIRCUMVENTING THE CONSTITUTION, June 27, 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://www.ivir.nl/publicaties/download/1375. We [HYPERLINK: http://www.ivir.nl/publicaties/download/1375] have argued that consolidation of the loopholes in EO 12333 within the Executive branch could leave Americans' Internet traffic as vulnerable to surveillance, and as unprotected by U.S. law, as the traffic of foreigners. Going forward, without a fundamental reconsideration of the lack of privacy and due process safeguards for non-U.S. persons, U.S. surveillance legislation leaves the door wide open for unrestrained surveillance on U.S. persons from abroad. 
516. Luke Milligan, (Prof., Law, U. Louisville Law School), HASTINGS LAW 
JOURNAL, Apr. 2014, 728. With each year, law enforcement becomes, on balance, more strategic in concealing new investigative techniques. Moreover, the pool of new, unregulated techniques available at a given time only deepens. Today the pool of unregulated techniques includes satellite surveillance, facial-scanning surveillance, cyborg surveillance insects, nano sensors, iris scanners, bomb-sniffing plants, --Smart Dust‖ motes, radio wave hacking, and nano-based radio-frequency identification barcodes. Tomorrow's pool is anybody's guess. 
517. Luke Milligan, (Prof., Law, U. Louisville Law School), HASTINGS LAW 
JOURNAL, Apr. 2014, 728. When a new technique finally becomes exposed and regulated, law enforcement can simply turn to its --bullpen‖ of unregulated techniques and carry on in its usual, unregulated manner. To put it differently: while specific investigative techniques may be unregulated only temporarily, the deep pool of new 
surveillance alternatives, at any given time, leaves police unregulated continuously. 
518. Audra Healey, (JD Candidate, George Washington U. Law School), FEDERAL 
COMMUNICATIONS LAW JOURNAL, Dec. 2014, 100. The NSA is easily able to operate around its apparent lack of authority. One anonymous official has been quoted as saying that the NSA consciously avoids the restrictions placed on it by FISA by collecting this information from access points all over the world. This method means that the NSA is not required to restrict itself to collecting contact lists belonging to specified intelligence targets. The collection mechanism ostensibly operates under the assumption that the bulk of the data collected through the overseas access points is not data from American citizens. However, this is not necessarily true due to the globalized nature of the Internet as a communications infrastructure, as 
--data crosses boundaries even when its American owners stay at home.‖ 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	57 
 
 
 
519. Ben Hayes, (Fellow, Transnational Institute). STATE OF SURVEILLANCE: THE NSA FILES AND THE GLOBAL FIGHTBACK, 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 
2015 from http://statewatch.org/news/2014/jan/state-of-surveillance-chapter.pdf.  [HYPERLINK: http://statewatch.org/news/2014/jan/state-of-surveillance-chapter.pdf]
First, digital communications frequently pass through the territory or jurisdiction of foreign countries, particularly the USA, where the majority of the world's internet traffic is destined. This means that if you are not a citizen of the USA, any constitutional right to privacy you might enjoy in your own country is likely all but worthless as you traverse large parts of the internet. Second, while the main protagonist in the NSA Files is of course the USA, that agency is at the centre of a still highly secretive and almost entirely unregulated transnational intelligence network with a global reach. 
520. Valerie Redmond, (JD Candidate), FORDHAM INTERNATIONAL LAW 
REVIEW, Apr. 2014, 765. Additionally, FISA's definition of surveillance is antiquated because it distinguishes between data acquired inside of the United States and outside of the United States. This distinction allows the NSA to process surveillance that is received from other countries irrespective of whether the target is a US citizen. Therefore, the NSA is unrestrained when a communication is not physically intercepted within the United States. 
521. Human Rights Watch, WITH LIBERTY TO MONITOR ALL: HOW LARGE- 
SCALE US SURVEILLANCE IS HARMING JOURNALISM, LAW, AND AMERICAN DEMOCRACY, 2014, 39. Another prominent journalist wondered whether the US government might fill its intelligence gaps on US persons by acquiring information - including, potentially, on journalists - from friendly foreign governments. Indeed, it is publicly known that the US has an intelligence sharing agreement with the UK, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand - a group of countries collectively called the --Five Eyes‖ - and has worked closely with various other intelligence services. As described in the next section, the US is known to have received intelligence about a US law firm's communications with its client from the Australian intelligence service. One senior intelligence official we spoke with noted that the US government can accept (though not solicit) intelligence about US persons from other governments even where the US is not permitted to gather that intelligence itself. 
522. G. Michael Fenner, (Prof., Law, Creighton U. School of Law), MONTANA 
LAWYER, Nov/Dec 2014, 13. I will start with an oversimplified history of American surveillance of domestic communications: not surveillance of communications taking place outside the U.S. As someone once said, --Outside the United States, the CIA prowls the alleys without a leash.‖ If your data leaves the country - even if only 
routed through an outside server - our intelligence community can access it at will. 
523. Lothar Determann, (Prof., Law, U. California's Hastings College of Law). 
HASTINGS CONSTITUTIONAL LAW QUARTERLY, May 2014, 15. There is no guarantee that even if the United States limits or stops surveillance, other countries will automatically follow its lead. To the contrary, many are likely trying to bolster their activities in an effort to match the United States. Thus, limiting U.S. surveillance may well reduce the security of people in the United States and its allied countries, increase their exposure to surveillance by other countries, and not increase anyone's net privacy protections. Further, surveillance and privacy discussions cannot remain limited to the public sector, as tech companies increasingly acquire vast amounts of data. 
524. Arun Kundnani, (Prof., Media & Culture at NYU), RACE, SURVEILLANCE 
AND EMPIRE, Mar. 21, 2015. Retrieved Apr. 10, 2015 from http://www.kundnani.org/2015/03/21/race-surveillance-and-empire-2/. On [HYPERLINK: http://www.kundnani.org/2015/03/21/race-surveillance-and-empire-2/] the one hand, most civil liberties advocates are focused on the technical details of potential legal reforms and new oversight mechanisms to safeguard privacy. Such initiatives are likely to bring little change because they fail to confront the racist and imperialist 
core of the surveillance system. 
525. Arun Kundnani, (Prof., Media & Culture at NYU), RACE, SURVEILLANCE 
AND EMPIRE, Mar. 21, 2015. Retrieved Apr. 10, 2015 from http://www.kundnani.org/2015/03/21/race-surveillance-and-empire-2/. On [HYPERLINK: http://www.kundnani.org/2015/03/21/race-surveillance-and-empire-2/] the other hand, most technologists believe the problem of government surveillance can be fixed simply by using better encryption tools. While encryption tools are useful in increasing the resources that a government agency would need to monitor an individual, they do nothing to unravel the larger surveillance apparatus. Meanwhile, executives of US tech corporations express concerns about loss of sales to foreign customers concerned about the privacy of data. In Washington and Silicon Valley, what should be a debate about basic political freedoms is simply a question of corporate profits. 
526. Arun Kundnani, (Prof., Media & Culture at NYU), RACE, SURVEILLANCE 
AND EMPIRE, Mar. 21, 2015. Retrieved Apr. 10, 2015 from 


528. Stewart Baker, (Attorney, Steptoe & Johnson, LLP), THE ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 70. And so, when a law enforcement task force of the FBI found out in August of 2001 that al Qaeda had sent two dangerous operatives to the United States, it did . . . nothing. It was told to stand down; it could not go looking for the two at Qaeda operatives because it was on the wrong side of the wall. I believe that FBI task three would have found the hijackers - who weren't hiding - and that the attacks could have been stopped if not for a combination of bad judgment by the FISA court (whose minimization rules were later thrown out on appeal) and a climate in which national security concerns were discounted by civil liberties advocates on 
both sides of the aisle. [ellipsis in original] 
529. Chuck Grassley, (U.S. Senator, Iowa), STRENGTHENING PRIVACY RIGHTS 
AND NATIONAL SECURITY: OVERSIGHT OF FISA SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2013, 4. We know that before 9/11 there was a wall erected under the Clinton administration between intelligence gathering and law enforcement. That wall contributed to our failure to be able to connect the dots and prevent 9/11. None of the reforms that we consider should effectively rebuild that wall. 
530. Ronald Sievert, (Prof., Government, U. Texas), NATIONAL SECURITY LAW 
JOURNAL, 2014, 52. In a very extensive, detailed investigation of the Boston Marathon bombing, Keith Maart further highlighted the confusion endemic to attempts at interpreting FISA. He noted that the Russian Federal Security Service (--FSB‖) had twice informed the FBI and CIA that Tamerlan Tsarnaev --had contacts with foreign Islamic militants/agents, was visiting jihadist websites and was looking to join jihadist groups‖ and that he had travelled to Dagestan on an unknown mission. Maart offered that it would certainly appear there was --sufficient probable cause to obtain FISA warrants that would allow . . . more encompassing surveillance.‖ However, the FBI had apparently come to a contrary conclusion. By adhering to FISA, we are weakening our intelligence collection capabilities rather than strengthening our ability to prevent catastrophic attacks by those who do not hesitate to target and inflict mass casualties on innocents. At the same time, we are overreacting to the government's access to the limited information contained in metadata that has been routinely collected by telephone companies for decades. 
[ellipsis in original] 
531. Lothar Determann, (Prof., Law, U. California's Hastings College of Law). 
HASTINGS CONSTITUTIONAL LAW QUARTERLY, May 2014, 19. In recent history, information sharing between federal intelligence agents and federal law enforcement officers was limited. A proverbial wall between federal agencies was erected under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (--FISA‖) - a U.S. statute that prescribes the ways in which physical and electronic foreign intelligence gathering and surveillance efforts are conducted. Law enforcement agencies restricted information sharing due to concerns that evidence resulting from data collection for intelligence purposes could be tainted and thus, inadmissible in criminal proceedings. Many within the United States Department of Justice (--DOJ‖) expressed frustration when their investigations were thwarted by the presence of what became known as 
the --FISA wall.‖ 
532. Lothar Determann, (Prof., Law, U. California's Hastings College of Law). 
HASTINGS CONSTITUTIONAL LAW QUARTERLY, May 2014, 19. The wall was specifically cited as one factor that hindered the FBI's ability to prevent the September 11 attacks. In the months leading up to the attacks, FBI criminal investigators and intelligence agents were focused on a number of the same targets. In August of 2001, intelligence agents were aware that three suspected terrorists - two of whom ultimately participated in the September 11 attacks - had entered the United States. Intelligence operatives opened an intelligence investigation but did not share surveillance information with criminal investigators for fear of violating the wall procedures. The FBI's criminal investigation went unresolved and just one month later the September 11 terrorist attacks were carried out. 
533. Ronald Sievert, (Prof., Government, U. Texas), NATIONAL SECURITY LAW 
JOURNAL, 2014, 51. Both the 9/11 Commission and Amy Zegart in her book Spying Blind have detailed how FBI agents were stymied in tracking the hijackers before the September 11th attacks because, as a result of FISA interpretations, lawyers in the Department of Justice's --Office of Intelligence and Policy Review, FBI leadership and the FISA Court built barriers between agents - even agents 
serving on the same squads.‖ 
534. Ronald Sievert, (Prof., Government, U. Texas), NATIONAL SECURITY LAW 
JOURNAL, 2014, 51-52. The FBI had detained hijacker Zacarias Moussaoui in Minneapolis days before the 9/11 attacks, but agents were prevented from scanning his computer because a supervisor at FBI Headquarters concluded there was not probable cause for a FISA warrant. Meanwhile, according to the DOJ Inspector 

http://www.kundnani.org/2015/03/21/race-surveillance-and-empire-2/.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.kundnani.org/2015/03/21/race-surveillance-and-empire-2/]	Better  [HYPERLINK: http://www.kundnani.org/2015/03/21/race-surveillance-and-empire-2/]	General's report, the Minneapolis office believed that --probable cause for the warrant 

oversight of the sprawling national security apparatus and greater use of encryption in 
digital communication should be welcomed. But by themselves these are likely to do little more than reassure technologists, while racialized populations and political dissenters continue to experience massive surveillance. This is why the most effective challenges to the national security state have come not from legal reformers or 
technologists but from grassroots campaigning by the racialized groups most 
affected. 
527. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), THE SURVEILLANCE 
TRANSPARENCY ACT OF 2013, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, Nov. 13, 2013, 60. In considering this new capability we can't have it both ways. We can't with one breath condemn government access to vast quantities of data about individuals, as a return of --Big Brother‖‗ and at the same time criticize the government for its failure to --connect the dots‖ (as we did, for example, during the Christmas 2009 bomb plot attempted by Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab). 
was clear‖ and --became increasingly frustrated with the responses and guidance it 
was receiving.‖ 
535. Richard Haas, (Pres., Council on Foreign Relations), FOREIGN POLICY 
BEGINS AT HOME: THE CASE FOR PUTTING AMERICA'S HOUSE IN ORDER, 2013, 99. As is often the case, a balance needs be struck. Effective counterterrorism requires that the federal government and law enforcement agencies be given enhanced capacity to monitor plans and activities of citizens and noncitizens alike. Americans need to recognize that the lines between what is domestic and what is foreign may have long traditions and legal standing but that they count for little in a global world in which borders of every sort are crossed with unimaginable frequency. Accepting some limits on what is seen as the right of privacy may be a price well worth paying in return for much-enhanced safety. 
536. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 1016. Both the wall and the foreign- domestic divide could be seen as protecting civil liberties and preventing the type of abuses uncovered by the Church Committee. But in the wake of the attacks of September 11, 2001, these constraints (or at least the perception thereof) were among the culprits fingered for missed opportunities to foil the terrorist plot. Apparently, --handoffs of information were lost across the divide separating the foreign and domestic agencies of government,‖ and --beliefs about what the wall required‖ inhibited the flow of information about the conspiracy and prevented the participation of criminal investigators in a search for two of the hijackers. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	58 
 
 
 
537. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 1017. The [PATRIOT Act] legislation tore down the wall by amending FISA to state that acquisition of foreign intelligence information need only be a significant purpose, rather than the primary purpose, of the surveillance. In addition, the Patriot Act explicitly permits information sharing among law enforcement and intelligence gathering offices. Indeed, one provision and a subsequent directive seemed to demand the expeditious flow of information between law enforcement and intelligence agencies. 
538. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington & Lee U. School of Law), CORNELL 
LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 1016. Since its establishment, the CIA was tasked with collecting intelligence outside of the United States but was given --no police, subpoena, or law enforcement powers or internal security functions.‖ In turn, the FBI was responsible for domestic surveillance, including gathering foreign intelligence within the United States. 
539. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]


546. Jane Bambauer, (Prof., Law, U. Arizona), CORNELL LAW REVIEW ONLINE, Oct. 2014, 195. DNA is not the only path to exoneration. Some of the wrongfully accused exculpate themselves using video recordings, transaction records, and other digital information. Given the gluttonous data collection practices of our government, these exoneration stories should be much more frequent than they are. Digital Innocence by Joshua A.T. Fairfield and Erik Luna puts forward an elegantly simple proposal: criminal defendants should have the same opportunities to access digital records that law enforcement officers and prosecutors do. 
547. Jane Bambauer, (Prof., Law, U. Arizona), CORNELL LAW REVIEW 
ONLINE, Oct. 2014, 195. Digital Innocence so persuasively demonstrates the exoneration potential of consumer transaction data that the article creates a dilemma for the authors: as the case for defensive use of consumer data is strengthened, so, too, is the case for large-scale collection of data in the first place. In fact, the innocence potential for consumer data arguably justifies not only the collection and retention of data by private third parties but the far more forbidding prospect of increased government data collection. After all, the state is in the best position to collect and permanently store data to ensure that exonerating information is preserved. Better yet, law enforcement agencies could use the data to exclude the 

tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. 	The 	United 	States 	suspect before an arrest or charge is brought in the first place. 

underestimated risk before 9/11 and relied on a cumbersome, legalistic, and 
fragmented defense. Creating new hurdles or restoring old ones increases the chance 
of a successful attack. 
540. Stewart Baker, (Former General Counsel, NSA), STRENGTHENING 
PRIVACY RIGHTS AND NATIONAL SECURITY: OVERSIGHT OF FISA SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2013, 85-86. As part of its --minimization procedures‖ for FISA taps, the court required a --wall‖ between law enforcement and intelligence. And by early 2001, it was enforcing that wall with unprecedented fervor. That was when the court's chief judge harshly disciplined an FBI supervisor for not strictly observing the wall and demanded an investigation that seemed to put the well-regarded agent at risk of a perjury prosecution. A chorus of civil liberties critics and a determined FISA court was sending the FBI a single clear message: the wall must be observed at all costs. And so, when a law enforcement task force of the FBI found out in August of 2001 that al Qaeda had sent two dangerous operatives to the United States, it did . . . nothing. It was told to stand down; it could not go looking for the two al Qaeda operatives because it was on the wrong side of the wall. I believe that FBI task force would have found the hijackers - who weren't hiding - and that the attacks could have been stopped if not for a combination of bad judgment by the FISA court (whose minimization rules were later thrown out on appeal) and a climate in which national security concerns were discounted by civil liberties advocates on both sides 
of the aisle. [ellipsis in original] 
541. David Greene, (Sr. Staff Attorney, Electronic Frontier Foundation), NSA MASS 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS: UNNECESSARY AND DISPROPORTIONATE, Apr. 29, 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from https://www.eff.org/files/2014/05/29/ unnecessary_and_disproportionate.pdf. The US surveillance framework is illegitimate because it applies less favorable standards to non-US persons than its own citizens; this discrimination places it in violation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) as well. 
542. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. We do know that ending NSA's role in mass surveillance will not end mass surveillance in Europe or other parts of the world. What it will do is reduce cooperation among allied and friendly services and the United States and restrict access to extraregional counterterrorism data. Cooperation will not end, but will be less effective at a time when jihadi fighters are beginning to return from Syria. There will be an increase in the risk that a plot will go undetected, but how much risk will increase is difficult to estimate. 
543. Danielle Citron, (Prof., Law, U. Maryland School of Law), HARVARD LAW 
REVIEW FORUM, May 2013, 272. Richards proposes to grant individuals standing to challenge governmental surveillance. Putting concerns about the constitutionality of such a challenge aside, his proposal may raise practical problems. Granting individuals standing to challenge governmental surveillance of them would overwhelm the courts. There are not enough judicial resources to adjudicate three hundred million such suits, each of which could be renewed - almost as soon as it is resolved - on nothing more than suspicion of continued surveillance because the focus, under Richards's approach, is on what information is being gathered. The possibility of a class action would not help matters because individual issues of harm attached to what particular information is gathered would predominate. Suits are also bound to be met with claims of national security interest, to which courts routinely show considerable deference. 
544. Menno Goedman, (JD, Harvard Law School), HARVARD JOURNAL ON 
LEGISLATION, Summer 2014, 386. More problematically, vesting the power of appointment in the Executive Branch makes no progress on minimizing the FISC's pro-government bias. In fact, it appears to make it worse since the President will possess the primary authority to appoint the very judges entrusted to constrain the Executive's prerogative. Even if one feels that federal judges are sufficiently independent to overcome this conflict of interest in practice, the perception of bias raises legitimacy concerns. Finally, H.R. 2761 is unlikely to produce significant geographic diversity, in part because the proposal removes the existing provisions that ensure at least a minimally diverse geographic representation. 
545. Bennett Capers (Prof., Law, Brooklyn Law School). FORDHAM URBAN LAW 
JOURNAL, Mar. 2013, 984-990. That citizens would have access to surveillance footage to challenge police actions should also be a factor in any reasonableness determination. But my larger point is this: the possibility that Big Brother will watch us does not have to be frightening. The task is to reimagine Big Brother so that he not only watches us; he also watches over us - to reimagine Big Brother as protective, and as someone who will be there to tell our side of the story. 
548. Jane Bambauer, (Prof., Law, U. Arizona), CORNELL LAW REVIEW 
ONLINE, Oct. 2014, 202. The next defense of the anti-collection position accepts that data collection may reduce wrongful convictions and asserts that the interests in privacy are nevertheless more valuable. This is the dark, less-talked-about companion to our commitment to let --ninety-nine guilty go free‖ - we are willing to lock up the occasional innocent in order to promote the civil liberties of the rest. Framed this way, the commitment to privacy comes at a price, but the trade-offs are not necessarily unreasonable. After all, all systems have error. Using all possible means to minimize the chance of false conviction can create intolerable costs. 
549. Jane Bambauer, (Prof., Law, U. Arizona), CORNELL LAW REVIEW 
ONLINE, Oct. 2014, 202-203. But scholars have failed to fully appreciate how the searchability of data - the use of filters and responsive algorithms - can fundamentally alter the basic assumptions about both privacy and law enforcement. To use another silly but illustrative example, suppose it were possible to automatically scan the contents of every American's home in order to find the house concealing a murder weapon without discovering any other personal and intimate details. This sort of magical searching process could help protect the wrongfully accused without interfering with privacy and autonomy to the extent that physical searches of every home would. 
550. Jane Bambauer, (Prof., Law, U. Arizona), CORNELL LAW REVIEW 
ONLINE, Oct. 2014, 203. Because of searchability, Big Data has potential that goes well beyond strengthening the efficiency of law enforcement (a good thing but not necessarily a paramount interest). Big Data can also constrain discretion, decrease systemic bias, protect the innocent, and improve government accountability. Put simply, Big Data can promote equitable law enforcement. 
551. Jane Bambauer, (Prof., Law, U. Arizona), CORNELL LAW REVIEW 
ONLINE, Oct. 2014, 203. If done properly, data-driven policing will decrease reliance on the observations, discretion, and assumptions of individual police officers. By searching databases for patterns that suggest a high probability of criminal conduct (either by searching for facts related to a specific criminal incident or by using an algorithm that reliably detects criminal behavior), police can reduce their reliance on traditional, but flawed, investigation methods. 
552. Jane Bambauer, (Prof., Law, U. Arizona), CORNELL LAW REVIEW 
ONLINE, Oct. 2014, 203. Pattern-based data mining is likely to improve the distributional fairness of the criminal justice system through two mechanisms. First, for any given crime, data mining provides an option for building suspicion without resorting to vague factors like --high crime area[s]‖ and --furtive movements,‖ which tend to concentrate in poor and minority neighborhoods. Second, pattern-based data mining improves the detection of different sorts of crimes - crimes like fraud, insider trading, and identity theft - which brings the attention of law enforcement to criminals who have greater social status and wealth. 
553. Jane Bambauer, (Prof., Law, U. Arizona), CORNELL LAW REVIEW 
ONLINE, Oct. 2014, 204. Data collection could protect wrongly suspected individuals at every point in the criminal justice process. Accurate data could undermine the probable cause that the police would otherwise have. This would protect the innocent person from search and arrest, and certainly from wrongful conviction. And of course, as Fairfield and Luna demonstrate, if criminal charges are brought against the wrong person, that person would have all the motivation needed 
to search for exculpating data. But in order to exculpate, the data first must exist. 
554. Jane Bambauer, (Prof., Law, U. Arizona), CORNELL LAW REVIEW 
ONLINE, Oct. 2014, 204. The protection of the innocent and the equitable treatment of all are some of the ends that privacy is meant to achieve. So, when a conception of privacy works against those things - obstructing exoneration and frustrating evenhanded enforcement - it is all the harder to defend its moral supremacy. To be clear, neither of these interests (reduced discretion or protection of the innocent) requires law enforcement to have unbounded access to personal data or to perform searches on any target it chooses without justification. But they do require the 
collection of large amounts of data that comprehensively describe the population. 
555. Jane Bambauer, (Prof., Law, U. Arizona), CORNELL LAW REVIEW 
ONLINE, Oct. 2014, 204-205. The noncollection option has the advantage of certainty. The police will not be able to exploit information and run unlimited searches on dissidents, journalists, and personal enemies if they have no consumer data. But just as certainly, the government will not be able to make accuracy, efficiency, and fairness improvements using that data. Viewed this way, the collection option looks pretty attractive, especially if it is combined with precautions to restrict overuse and abuse of the data. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	59 
 
 
 
556. Jane Bambauer, (Prof., Law, U. Arizona), CORNELL LAW REVIEW ONLINE, Oct. 2014, 205. Jack Balkin has warned that a government hooked on data (what he calls the National Surveillance State) is destined to become both a data glutton and a data miser. Like gluttons, the government will collect everything it can; and like misers, it will keep the data and its operations secret. Even if the gluttony is not as bad as we think it is, a lack of transparency will throw all the benefits into doubt. Transparency is a precondition for efficacy and accountability. Efficacy ensures that the promise of increased accuracy is not illusory, and accountability ensures that the anticipated decreases in discretion are real. 
557. Jane Bambauer, (Prof., Law, U. Arizona), CORNELL LAW REVIEW 
ONLINE, Oct. 2014, 206. Regardless of its wisdom, government data collection is likely to accelerate. Defensive access to government and third-party data protects society in two ways. First, access to data advances the due process rights of innocent defendants. Second, even when a defendant accessing data is not factually innocent, such access provides a checking function on the government by uncovering ignored leads or unexplained differences in how the police enforces crime. The lessons from Digital Innocence will help bend the inevitable expansion of data-driven policing towards justice. 
558. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 987. Modern surveillance technology can provide both inculpating and exculpating evidence. Electronic eavesdropping can catch the guilty red-handed, but it can also provide alibis for the wrongfully accused and convicted. With citizens' lives increasingly logged and tracked, online and off, the chance of finding evidence tending to prove innocence only increases. The breadth and depth of corporate and government surveillance seem to guarantee the existence of exonerating evidence, stored somewhere, proving the innocence of suspects and defendants. Assuming computer engineers can refine the tools necessary to find it, proof of innocence will be uncovered in some yet-to-be-determined number of cases. This Article calls for the development of a new concept - digital innocence - seeking to leverage the tools and content of Big Data to prevent wrongful 
convictions and provide hard proof of actual innocence for those already convicted. 
559. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 986. If the government gathers information about its citizens, it cannot use that data solely to accuse and convict - or worse yet, hide the information or obfuscate its source - leaving the individual with no defense. Consistent with well-established rights of evidentiary access, the information must be made available to defendants to protect against wrongful convictions and to exonerate those who have already been convicted. 
560. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 988-989. The defense bar has begun to recognize that a client being on camera, or being recorded, or being geolocated, can be a good thing. The growth of data collection, connection, and parsing capabilities could transform Big Data technologies into an important tool for establishing innocence. 
561. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 990. In fact, the path of DNA technology through legal institutions may serve as a trail for digital innocence. Proof-of- innocence technologies exert a unique influence on the criminal justice system. Although prosecutors do not always respond well to wrongful conviction claims - especially those premised on human error, such as false confessions and mistaken witness identifications - hard scientific proof of innocence is more likely to move the government to drop charges or acquiesce to the release of an inmate. The DNA technology literature therefore sets the stage for a discussion about the broader role of technology in establishing innocence. 
562. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 991. Prosecutors often gather cookie data, search terms, web-surfing history, and cell-site location information as part of their case against the accused. But in the future, this data need not accrue exclusively to the benefit of prosecutors. As search algorithms get better and private citizens obtain access to data-mining tools and technologies, defense counsel might have a significantly greater ability to prove actual innocence by finding some specific video from a local camera, for instance, or by cross-referencing geolocation information from a cellphone, thereby showing that the defendant was not at a given place at a given time. The question is whether the massive amounts of data gathered about every American citizen will result in a similar or even greater potential to exonerate the innocent. We predict it will. 
563. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 991-992. Commercial and government actors gather enormous amounts of data about every element of people's daily lives. An individual's real-world location is shown by his cellphone geolocation information. Each person's text messages and e-mails are stored, parsed, and keyword-searched, with his buying habits, online and offline, systematically incorporated into comprehensive databases. People are also subject to increasing amounts of public surveillance. Cameras on street corners, cameras on ATMs, cameras from shop windows, and cameras carried by citizens provide a wealth of photographic and audio evidence that might bear on a criminal case. Most importantly, all of this information is being stored, awaiting more useful access to the data. 
564. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 992-993. Generations of defense lawyers struggled to free inmates who they believed to be innocent, but the available means to upend convictions were limited to recantations by witnesses and confessions by the actual perpetrators. Even in the rare cases where such evidence surfaced, defense claims were often procedurally barred. In what seems like a flash, DNA tests performed during the last decade of the [twentieth] century not only have freed sixty- four individuals but have exposed a system of law that has been far too complacent about its fairness and accuracy. 


565. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 993. One estimate places the wrongful conviction rate in the United States at between 0.5% and 1%, which would mean that 2000 to 4000 innocent defendants are imprisoned each year. The single discipline of DNA technology cannot serve as the comprehensive source of information needed to meaningfully reduce the incidence of wrongful convictions. The coming wave of Big Data information technologies has the potential to provide hard proof of actual innocence in many of the non-DNA cases. 
566. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 993-994. In fact, data-mining technology could have an even greater backward-reaching impact on the criminal justice system. Mindboggling amounts of data are being gathered and stored, although defendants currently lack the capacity to access the contents or to isolate factors that might demonstrate their innocence. The discrepancy between the present collection of large amounts of data, and the now budding industry of analyzing and drawing connections from and between that data, means that there are now people in prison who will be exonerated when the data-mining tools become good enough to locate and aggregate proof of their innocence. 
567. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 994. The DNA revolution and concomitant actual innocence movement provide glimpses of the future for digital innocence. Among other things, dozens of innocence projects have opened around the country; national conferences are held on wrongful conviction every year; professional training on the sources and prevention of wrongful convictions is widely available to defense attorneys and other criminal justice actors; and every state has enacted post- conviction DNA testing statutes often accompanied by provisions for the preservation of biological evidence. One could imagine similar efforts focused on Big Data technologies, such as the creation of a --Digital Innocence Project,‖ which could provide legal representation in cases of actual innocence; curate online communities and develop open source resources; educate defense lawyers, prosecutors, and judges; and positively shape the law by, for instance, seeking the expansion of DNA-specific statutes to include evidence gleaned from data science. 
568. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 996-997. The odds of storing a piece of exonerating evidence must grow at least linearly as a function of the increase in storage capacity (i.e., storing more of what is already being stored) and as a function of the increase in types of information stored (i.e., storing additional kinds of information). Actually, there is reason to believe that the ability to prove innocence digitally will increase more than linearly. Bigger databases allow algorithms to make more connections, and more connections yield the ability to monetize more data, which in turn creates even bigger databases. 
569. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 1000-1001. With increases in data storage, data flexibility, and data-processing efficiency come new tools that use the data to produce meaningful results for the prosecution or defense. One possible example is the new RIOT (rapid information overlay technology) system modeled by the security firm Raytheon. RIOT gathers geolocation data from a range of social media platforms to provide an in-depth picture of the ongoing life of the target. For instance, the system identified that a test subject used the gym every Monday at 6:00 AM. Obviously, this would be an extremely useful fact for anyone who was interested in finding the subject or in gaining access to his laptop. 
570. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 1004-1005. Information from social media is often publicly posted, publicly stored, and even publicly searchable for a limited time. It may not be permanently stored outside of the virtual wall of the social network itself, however, and semi-closed ecosystems like Facebook can be hard to research. But tweets and blogs are often stored by wayback machines or Internet archives, and in some cases, Google itself keeps a record of an archived page. This quasi-public data could be an important source of exculpatory evidence as access and search tools grow in strength. 
571. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 1005. At first, digital innocence may be proved by single --smoking gun‖ pieces of evidence culled from now-colossal datasets. But just as guilt is often established by piecing together different pieces of data into a convincing pattern, innocence might be demonstrated in a similar fashion by linked data and pattern analysis. The more linked data the system can access, the more patterns that may emerge, even from unlikely concatenations of data points. 
572. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 1006. The question is whether defense or later exoneration efforts can also benefit from data aggregation and cross-linking. As always, access constraints are a problem, but the barrier is decreasing over time. Already many of these databases can be accessed by anyone with a limited liability company and a credit card. For example, a privacy advocate purchased for $ 5 the personal details of one million Facebook users, from a seller who allegedly employed Facebook apps to gather the information. 
573. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 1026. The ultimate resolution of this issue remains unclear. In an historic ruling in January 2014, a federal court in Chicago ordered the disclosure of FISA application materials to the defense. But the ruling in United States v. Daoud was stayed so the appellate process could run its course, and even if the order is upheld, the revealed materials may not exonerate the defendant. Instead, it is more likely that the disclosures will --be highly embarrassing to the 
government.‖ 
574. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 1031. The government is not compelled to use Big Data or to engage in mass surveillance, and it certainly is under no obligation to prosecute cases as a result of the information it finds. But when it does, the government must provide a basic level of evidentiary access and ability to challenge the prosecution as required by the Constitution. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	60 
 
 
 
575. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 1054. There is another way for the wrongfully accused and convicted to access Big Data. The government seeks the vast majority of its information from telecommunications firms and ISPs. These commercial enterprises maintain the comprehensive user records that feed programs like PRISM. So rather than seeking exculpatory evidence from the government, defendants could obtain this information directly from third-party Internet intermediaries. 
576. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 1057. The SCA [Stored Communications Act] does not prohibit the release to a defendant of information about him or herself, including content information. Given Big Data tracking, this can be a treasure trove of material for the defense. Consider, for example, the data collected about a user for the purposes of targeted advertising. As discussed earlier, most users' physical location or location-based IP address are constantly tracked by advertisers. That information can serve as a comprehensive record of where the defendant was on a particular day and time. Companies may still object, of course, but they will be unlikely to prevail in such straightforward requests for production. When Yahoo refused to provide a defendant with the contents of his own e-mail accounts, for instance, the court noted that a motion to compel production from Yahoo would be the next best step to obtain the data. 
577. Joshua Fairfield, (Prof., Law, Washington and Lee U. School of Law), 
CORNELL LAW REVIEW, July 2014, 1060. If the government chooses to prosecute, it is obliged to provide access to information not only within its immediate possession but also within its reach. This argument carries even greater force in criminal prosecutions. Criminal cases implicate strong constitutional interests vindicated by providing a reasonable process for accessing potentially exonerating evidence. Moreover, prosecutors bear a higher burden of accuracy and care than do civil plaintiffs. While tort and contract litigants are free to be as partisan as the rules of civil procedure and ethics allow, prosecutors have a special obligation to support the truth-seeking functions of the court and a --duty to refrain from improper methods 
calculated to produce a wrongful conviction.‖ 
578. Steven Lautt, (JD Cand), WASHBURN LAW JOURNAL, Spr. 2012, 381. 
Modern technology has proven that the long-running history of police abuse and 
corruption is alive and well in the United States. Although new and developing technology is exposing these injustices, the tried and true principle that sunlight is the best of disinfectants should guide our society's efforts to fight these injustices. 
579. Dustin Robinson, (JD Cand), GEORGETOWN LAW JOURNAL, Apr. 2012, 

584. Steven Bradbury, (Attorney, Dechert, LLP), THE ADMINISTRATION'S USE 
OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 106. The NSA has confirmed that in all of 2012, there were fewer than 300 queries of the database, and only a tiny fraction of the data has ever been reviewed by analysts. The database is kept segregated and is not accessed for any other purpose, and FISA requires the government to follow procedures overseen by the court to minimize any unnecessary dissemination of U.S. numbers generated from the queries. 
585. Steven Bradbury, (Attorney & Former Head of the Office of Legal Counsel, 
U.S. Dept. of Justice), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA 
AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 132. While the metadata order is extraordinary in terms of the amount of data acquired, which is far greater than the amotmt of data involved in most other federal agency investigations, the metadata order is also extraordinarily narrow and focused because of the strict limitations placed on accessing the data. There's no data mining or trolling through the database looking for suspicious patterns. By court order, the data can only be accessed when the government has reasonable suspicion that a particular phone number is associated with a foreign terrorist organization, and then that number is tested against the database to discover its connections. If it appears to be a U.S. number, the necessary suspicion cannot be based solely on First Amendment- protected activity. 
586. Rachel Brand, (Member, Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board), 
EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 186. The Board's Report describes these procedures, but it bears repeating just how hard it is for the government to make any use of the data collected under this program. For example, before even looking at what the database holds on a particular phone number, an NSA analyst must first be able to produce some evidence - enough to establish --reasonable, articulable suspicion‖ or --RAS‖ - that that particular phone number is connected to a specific terrorist group listed in the FISC's order. Only a handful of trained analysts are authorized do this. Before typing the phone number into a search field, the analyst must document the --RAS‖ determination in writing. And if the results of the query reveal a pattern of calls that seems worth investigating further, the analyst must jump through a series of additional hoops before gathering more information about the communications or distributing that information to other agencies. As a result, only an infinitesimal percentage of the records collected are ever viewed by any human being, much less used for any further purpose. With the safeguards already in place and the additional limitations this Board recommends, I believe the actual intrusion on privacy interests will be small. 
587. John Inglis, (Dir., National Security Agency), STRENGTHENING PRIVACY 

1418. The opposite of surveillance from above is surveillance from below, or 	RIGHTS AND NATIONAL SECURITY: 	OVERSIGHT OF FISA 

sousveillance. As expounded by technological philosopher Steve Mann, sousveillance 
offers a counteracting force for a citizenry subjected to constant surveillance. While a person cannot destroy the cameras or eyes that constantly watch him, he can return the gaze. If those being watched become the watchers of the watchers, then the cowing effect of surveillance, at the least, can be minimized. 
580. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 119. Indeed, there are already indications that these strong audit mechanisms are effective. Recall the incident in the 2008 presidential campaign in which contractors hacked into Barack Obama's passport file. In this instance, there was no lawful reason for the disclosure of the file; it was disclosed purely for prurient, political reasons. As a result, candidate Obama suffered an adverse consequence of disclosure, which had not met any legal trigger that would have permitted the disclosure. A strong audit function quickly identified the wrongdoers and allowed punitive action to be taken. We can, therefore, be reasonably confident that as we move forward in establishing a consequence-based system of privacy protection we are also moving toward a point where the legal structures and 
technological capabilities to support that system are being put into place. 
581. David Lungren, (U.S. Representative, California), NOTRE DAME JOURNAL 
OF LAW, ETHICS & PUBLIC POLICY, 2012, 445. It should also be noted that the standards and procedures established under section 215 for obtaining an order from the FISA Court do not implicate the Fourth Amendment. The rationale for what has come to be known as the "third party doctrine" is that the disclosure of information to a third party vitiates a reasonable expectation of privacy. However, Professor Orin Kerr has argued that the better rationale can be better understood in terms of the consent doctrine. As he frames the argument, "disclosure to third parties eliminates 
protection because it implies consent." 
582. Administration White Paper, BULK COLLECTION OF TELEPHONY 
METADATA UNDER SECTION 215 OF THE USA PATRIOT ACT, Aug. 9, 2013, 19. The telephony metadata collection program also complies with the Constitution. Supreme Court precedent makes clear that participants in telephone calls lack any reasonable expectation of privacy under the Fourth Amendment in the metadata records generated by their telephone calls and held by telecommunications service providers. Moreover, any arguable privacy intrusion arising from the collection of telephony metadata would be outweighed by the critical public interest in identifying connections between terrorist operatives and thwarting terrorist plots, rendering the program reasonable within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment. The program is also consistent with the First Amendment, particularly given that the database may be used only as an investigative tool in authorized investigations of international terrorism. 
583. Joel Alexander, (Civil Liberties Protection Officer, U.S. Office of the Director 
of National Intelligence), DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE, 2015, 51. Under the phone metadata program, the government obtains and reviews phone records only to identify whether telephones associated with a foreign terrorist organization are in communication with a telephone inside the United States (directly or indirectly). This does not involve collecting actual phone conversations. While the government believes that it has been carrying out this program in a manner that protects both national security and privacy, we are carefully exploring alternatives with the congressional oversight committees to address public concerns. 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2013, 57. The metadata acquired and stored under the 215 authority may be queried only when there is a reasonable suspicion based on specific facts that a --selector‖ - which is typically a phone number - is associated with specific foreign terrorist organizations. Under rules approved by the court, only 22 people at NSA are allowed to approve the selectors used to initiate a search in this data base; all queries are audited; only seven positions at NSA (a total of 11 people) are authorized to release query results that are believed to be associated with persons in the US. Reports are filed with the court every 30 days that specify the number of selectors approved, and disseminations made to the FBI that contain numbers believed to be in the US. 
588. Administration White Paper, BULK COLLECTION OF TELEPHONY 
METADATA UNDER SECTION 215 OF THE USA PATRIOT ACT, Aug. 9, 2013, 3. The Government cannot conduct substantive queries of the bulk records for any purpose other than counterterrorism. Under the FISC orders authorizing the collection, authorized queries may only begin with an --identifier,‖ such as a telephone number, that is associated with one of the foreign terrorist organizations that was previously identified to and approved by the Court. An identifier used to commence a query of the data is referred to as a --seed.‖ Specifically, under Court- approved rules applicable to the program, there must be a --reasonable, articulable suspicion‖ that a seed identifier used to query the data for foreign intelligence purposes is associated with a particular foreign terrorist organization. When the seed identifier is reasonably believed to be used by a U.S. person, the suspicion of an association with a particular foreign terrorist organization cannot be based solely on activities protected by the First Amendment. The --reasonable, articulable suspicion‖ requirement protects against the indiscriminate querying of the collected data. 
589. Richard Clarke et al. (Chair, President's Review Group on Intelligence and 
Communications Technologies), LIBERTY AND SECURITY IN A CHANGING WORLD, Dec. 12, 2013, 104. In 2012, NSA's 288 queries resulted in a total of twelve --tips‖ to the FBI that called for further investigation. If the FBI investigates a telephone number or other identifier tipped to it through the section 215 program, it must rely on other information to identify the individual subscribers of any of the numbers retrieved. If, through further investigation, the FBI is able to develop probable cause to believe that an identifier in the United States is conspiring with a person engaged in terrorist activity, it can then seek an order from the FISC authorizing it to intercept the contents of future communications to and from that telephone number. 
590. James Cole, (Deputy Attorney General of the United States), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 6. The 215 program, as many of you have already heard, involves the collection of metadata from telephone calls. These are telephone records maintained by the phone companies. They include the number that was dialed, the date and time of the call, and the length of the call. They do not include names or other personal identifying information. They do not include cell site or other location information, and they do not include the content of any phone calls. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	61 
 
 
 
591. James Cole, (Deputy Attorney General of the United States), STRENGTHENING PRIVACY RIGHTS AND NATIONAL SECURITY: OVERSIGHT OF FISA SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2013, 49-50. The 215 program involves the collection of metadata from telephone calls. These are telephone records maintained by the phone companies. They include the number a call was dialed from, the number the call was dialed to, the date and time of the call, and the length of the call. The records do not include names or other personal identifying information, they do not include cell site or other location information, and they do not include the content of any phone calls. These are the kinds of records that under longstanding Supreme Court precedent are not protected by the Fourth Amendment. 
592. Rachel Brand, (Member, Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board), 
EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 187. On the other hand, the government does not collect the content of any communication under this program. It does not collect any personally identifying information associated with the calls. And it does not collect cell site information that could closely pinpoint the location from which a cell phone call was made. The program is literally a system of numbers with no names attached to any of them. As such, it does not sweep in the most sensitive and revealing information about telephone communications. This seems to have gotten lost in the public debate. In addition, the program operates within strict safeguards and limitations. 
593. Steven Bradbury, (Attorney, Dechert, LLP), THE ADMINISTRATION'S USE 
OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 105. The metadata acquired consists of the transactional information that phone companies retain in their systems for a period of time in the ordinary course of business for billing purposes and that appears on typical phone bills. It includes only data fields showing which phone numbers called which numbers and the time and duration of 


599. Administration White Paper, BULK COLLECTION OF TELEPHONY METADATA UNDER SECTION 215 OF THE USA PATRIOT ACT, Aug. 9, 2013, 3. The most analytically significant terrorist-related communications are those with one end in the United States or those that are purely domestic, because those communications are particularly likely to identify suspects in the United States - whose activities may include planning attacks against the homeland. The telephony metadata collection program was specifically developed to assist the U.S. Government in detecting communications between known or suspected terrorists who are operating outside of the United States and who are communicating with others inside the United States, as well as communications between operatives within the United States. In this respect, the program helps to close critical intelligence gaps that were highlighted by the September 11, 2001 attacks. 
600. Robert Litt, (General Counsel, Office of the Director of National Intelligence), 
IC ON THE RECORD, Mar. 17, 2014. Retrieved Feb. 8, 2015 from http://icontherecord.tumblr.com/post/79998577649/as-prepared-for-delivery-remarks- of- 
odni-general. Sophisticated analysis of metadata could help us identify terrorists or 
other persons of interest as a basis for further inquiry - and thus help appropriately 
and narrowly focus how we use other forms of intelligence collection. 
601. Administration White Paper, BULK COLLECTION OF TELEPHONY 
METADATA UNDER SECTION 215 OF THE USA PATRIOT ACT, Aug. 9, 2013, 2. Although broad in scope, the telephony metadata collection program meets the --relevance‖ standard of Section 215 because there are --reasonable grounds to believe‖ that this category of data, when queried and analyzed consistent with the Court-approved standards, will produce information pertinent to FBI investigations of international terrorism, and because certain analytic tools used to accomplish this 
objective require the collection and storage of a large volume of telephony metadata. 
602. John Inglis, (Dir., National Security Agency), STRENGTHENING PRIVACY 

the calls. This order does not give the government access to any information about 	RIGHTS AND NATIONAL SECURITY: 	OVERSIGHT OF FISA 

the content of calls or any other subscriber information, and it doesn't enable the 
government to listen to anyone's phone calls. 
594. Richard Clarke et al. (Chair, President's Review Group on Intelligence and 
Communications Technologies), LIBERTY AND SECURITY IN A CHANGING WORLD, Dec. 12, 2013, 17. Under section 215 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA), the government now stores bulk telephony metadata, understood as information that includes the telephone numbers that both originate and receive calls, time of call, and date of call. Meta-data does not include the content of calls. 
595. Julia Angwin, (Staff, Wall Street Journal), DRAGNET NATION: A QUEST 
FOR PRIVACY, SECURITY, AND FREEDOM IN A WORLD OF RELENTLESS SURVEILLANCE, 2014, 26. Amazingly, it turns out that the warrantless wiretapping was one of the more restrained NSA programs, since it captured only U.S.-to-foreign communications. Far more sweeping were the vast amounts of phone and Internet traffic that the NSA began collecting within the United States. Because it was just --metadata,‖ the NSA argued that sweeping up domestic phone calling records and Internet traffic was not violating Americans' privacy. 
596. Administration White Paper, BULK COLLECTION OF TELEPHONY 
METADATA UNDER SECTION 215 OF THE USA PATRIOT ACT, Aug. 9, 2013, 4. Only information responsive to the limited queries that are authorized for counterterrorism purposes is extracted and reviewed by analysts. Although the number of unique identifiers has varied substantially over the years, in 2012, fewer than 300 met the --reasonable, articulable suspicion‖ standard and were used as seeds to query the data after meeting the standard. Because the same seed identifier can be queried more than once over time, can generate multiple responsive records, and can be used to obtain contact numbers up to three --hops‖ from the seed identifier, the number of metadata records responsive to such queries is substantially larger than 300, but it is still a tiny fraction of the total volume of metadata records. It would be impossible to conduct these queries effectively without a large pool of telephony metadata to search, as there is no way to know in advance which numbers will be responsive to the authorized queries. 
597. John Inglis, (Deputy U.S. Attorney General), THE ADMINISTRATION'S USE 
OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 10-11. During 2012, we only initiated searches for information in this [telephone records] dataset using fewer than 300 unique identifiers. The information returned from these searches only included phone numbers, not the content, the identity, or location of the called or calling party. Under rules approved by the court, only 22 people at NSA are allowed to approve the selectors used to initiate the search in this database. All queries are audited. Only 7 positions at NSA, a total of 11 people, are authorized to release the query results believed to be associated with persons in the United States. Reports are filed with the court every 30 days that specify the number of selectors that have been approved and the disseminations made to the FBI of reports that contain numbers believed to be in the U.S. 
598. Emily Berman, (Prof., Law, Brooklyn Law School), FORDHAM LAW 
REVIEW, Mar. 2013, 1798-1799. Congress requested an audit of business-records orders, for example, in response to concerns voiced by the American Library Association (ALA), which opposed allowing the government to access library records with these orders. The ALA waged a campaign successful enough for the underlying provision to become known as --the library provision,‖ even though it can be used to acquire --any tangible thing.‖ But as of the first PATRIOT Act renewal, congressional inquiry revealed that this power had never been invoked to acquire library records. Instead, Congress discovered, libraries had voluntarily provided records to the government. 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2013, 
55. So the problem becomes, if you have one telephone number for a person you reasonably believe is plotting an act of terror against the homeland, how do you find possible connections to that number crossing the seam between the homeland and overseas? In simple terms, you are looking for a needle, in this case a number, in a haystack. But not just any number. You want to make a focused query against a body of data that returns only those numbers that are connected to the one you have reasonable suspicion is connected to a terrorist group. But unless you have the haystack - in this case all the records of who called whom - you cannot answer the question. The confidence you will have in any answers returned by your query is necessarily tied to whether the haystack constitutes a reasonably complete set of records and whether those records look back a reasonable amount of time to enable you to discover a connection between conspirators who might plan and coordinate across several years. Hence --all‖ the records are necessary to connect the dots of an ongoing plot, sometimes in a time sensitive situation, even if only an extremely small fraction of them is ever determined to be the match you're looking for. 
603. John Yoo, (Prof., Law, U. California at Berkeley Law School), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Summer 2014, 908. Section 215 does not contain a revolutionary grant of authority to the government. It authorizes something akin to a grand jury subpoena for financial, communication, or travel records as part of a criminal investigation. In fact, the statute additionally defines the records as those that can be obtained by a subpoena issued by a federal court as part of a grand jury investigation. Section 215 of the Patriot Act provides the authority for the NSA's collection of telephone billing records. The NSA collects the data containing the phone numbers on both ends of a call and the duration of every call made in the United States. But it does not intercept the content of the call, nor does it know the identity of the subscriber. It collects the information into a database of all calls in the nation, which did not exist previously because multiple telecommunications companies would delete their records. The NSA purges records that are more than five years old. A database allows the NSA to determine quickly the calling chain of any overseas numbers discovered to belong to al Qaeda operatives. Once the NSA tracks down the phone numbers called within the United States from a suspected al Qaeda phone number, it can then seek a warrant from the FISC to place the number under further surveillance and to collect other records, such as financial and travel information. 
604. John Yoo, (Prof., Law, U. California at Berkeley Law School), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Summer 2014, 907-908. Like business records, phone call metadata falls within Section 215's definition of tangible items. Collection of such metadata relates to an authorized investigation to protect against international terrorism. Several investigations into al Qaeda plots remain open, as shown by the repeated indictments against bomb plotters in the last five years. The examination of records also helps protect the nation against terrorist attacks. According to the NSA, only the information contained in the billing records is collected; the content of calls is not. There can be no First Amendment violation if the content of the calls remains untouched. 
605. John Yoo, (Prof., Law, U. California at Berkeley Law School), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Summer 2014, 908-909. When our intelligence agents successfully locate or capture an al Qaeda member, they must be able to move quickly to follow new information to other operatives before news of the capture causes them to disappear. The NSA database is particularly important because it will point the way to al Qaeda agents within the United States, where they are closest to their targets and able to inflict the most harm on civilians. 
606. John Yoo, (Prof., Law, U. California at Berkeley Law School), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Summer 2014, 910. As the United States fought the Afghanistan and Iraq wars, and as it has continued to pursue al Qaeda groups in the Middle East and Africa, it has captured al Qaeda laptops, cell phones, financial documents, and other instruments of modern high-tech life. This has given intelligence officers information on dozens or hundreds of e-mail addresses, telephone numbers, bank and credit account numbers, and residential and office addresses used by al Qaeda networks. To exploit this, U.S. intelligence services must follow those leads as fast as possible, before the network of al Qaeda operatives can migrate to a new leader. An e-mail lead can disappear as quickly as it takes someone to open a new e-mail account. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	62 
 
 
 
607. Eric Schmidt, (Former Chief Technology Officer, Oracle America), THE NEW DIGITAL AGE: RESHAPING THE FUTURE OF PEOPLE, NATIONS AND BUSINESS, 2013, 157. Given the importance of digital marketing for future terrorists, we anticipate that they will increasingly look to infiltrate mobile and Internet companies. Some Islamist groups have already tried to do this. Maajid Nawaz, a former leader in Hizb ut-Tahrir (HT) - a global extremist group that seeks the overthrow of Muslim-majority governments through military coups and the creation of a worldwide Islamist superstate - told us his organization had a policy of recruiting from mobile-phone companies. 
608. Eric Schmidt, (Former Chief Technology Officer, Oracle America), THE NEW 
DIGITAL AGE: RESHAPING THE FUTURE OF PEOPLE, NATIONS AND BUSINESS, 2013, 158. As global connectivity renders extremist groups more dangerous and more capable, traditional solutions will appear increasingly ineffective. In many parts of the world, simply imprisoning terrorists will have little effect on their network or their ability to influence it. Smuggled handsets will enable extremists to run command-and-control centers from inside prison walls, and the task of confiscating or otherwise limiting the power of these devices will only get harder as the basic components of smart phones - the processors, SIM cards (memory cards used in mobile phones that can carry data from one phone to another) and the rest - get smaller and more powerful. 
609. Rachel Brand, (Member, Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board), 
EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 188-189. Evidence suggests that if the data from the Section 215 program had been available prior to the attacks of September 11, 2001, it could have been instrumental in preventing those attacks. The clear implication is that this data could help the government thwart a future attack. Considering this, I cannot recommend shutting down the program without an adequate alternative in place, especially in light of what I view to be the relatively small actual intrusion on privacy interests. 
610. John Yoo, (Prof., Law, U. California at Berkeley Law School), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Summer 2014, 909. Our intelligence agents, in fact, had strong leads that could conceivably have led them to all of the hijackers before 9/11. CIA agents had identified Mihdhar as a likely al Qaeda operative because he was spotted at a meeting in Kuala Lumpur and mentioned in Middle East intercepts as part of an al Qaeda --cadre.‖ Hazmi too was known as likely to be al Qaeda. But in neither case was there enough evidence for a criminal arrest because they had not violated any American laws. If our intelligence services had been able to track immediately their cell phone calls and e-mail, it is possible that enough of the hijacking team could have been rounded up to avert 9/11. 
611. Administration White Paper, BULK COLLECTION OF TELEPHONY 
METADATA UNDER SECTION 215 OF THE USA PATRIOT ACT, Aug. 9, 2013, 2. One of the greatest challenges the United States faces in combating international terrorism and preventing potentially catastrophic terrorist attacks on our country is identifying terrorist operatives and networks, particularly those operating within the United States. Detecting threats by exploiting terrorist communications has been, and continues to be, one of the critical tools in this effort. It is imperative that we have the capability to rapidly identify any terrorist threat inside the United States. One important method that the Government has developed to accomplish this task is analysis of metadata associated with telephone calls within, to, or from the United States. 
612. John Inglis, (Dir., National Security Agency), STRENGTHENING PRIVACY 


615. John Yoo, (Prof., Law, U. California at Berkeley Law School), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Summer 2014, 930. The primary objective of the NSA program is to --detect and prevent‖ possible al Qaeda attacks on the United States, whether another attack like September 11; a bomb in apartment buildings, bridges, or transportation hubs such as airports; or a nuclear, biological, or chemical attack. These are not hypotheticals; they are all al Qaeda plots, some of which U.S. intelligence and law enforcement agencies have already stopped. A President will want to use information gathered by the NSA to deploy military, intelligence, and law enforcement personnel to stop the next attack. The price to pay for speed, however, is foregoing any future criminal prosecution. If the President wants to use the NSA to engage in warrantless searches, he cannot use its fruits in an ordinary criminal prosecution. 
616. John Yoo, (Prof., Law, U. California at Berkeley Law School), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Summer 2014, 930. Al Qaeda has launched a variety of efforts to attack the United States, and it intends to continue them. The primary way to stop those attacks is to find and stop al Qaeda operatives, and the best way to find them is to intercept their electronic communications. 
617. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]
tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. The incidence of attacks in the 
United States or Europe is very low, but we do not have good data on the number of 
planned attacks that did not come to fruition. This includes not just attacks that were 
detected and stopped, but also attacks where the jihadis were discouraged and did not 
initiate an operation or press an attack to its conclusion because of operational 
difficulties. These attacks are the threat that mass surveillance was created to prevent. The needed reduction in public anti-terror measures without increasing the chances of 
successful attack is contingent upon maintaining the capability provided by 
communications surveillance to detect, predict, and prevent attacks. Our opponents 
have not given up; neither should we. 
618. Rachel Brand, (Member, Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board), 
EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 186. The statutory question - whether the language of Section 215 authorizes the telephony bulk metadata program - is a difficult one. But the government's interpretation of the statute is at least a reasonable reading, made in good faith by numerous officials in two Administrations of different parties who take seriously their responsibility to protect the American people from terrorism consistent with the rule of law. Moreover, it has been upheld by many Article III judges, including over a dozen FISC judges and Judge Pauley in a thorough opinion in a regular, public proceeding in U.S. District Court. 
619. John Yoo, (Prof., Law, U. California at Berkeley Law School), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Summer 2014, 913. The NSA's program falls precisely within FISA as currently written. Congress specifically amended the statute, at first temporarily in 2007 and then permanently in 2008, to authorize this exact program. It most recently renewed this authority, codified in section 702 of FISA, in 2012. Section 702 allows the government to target for surveillance a non- 
U.S. person reasonably believed to be outside the United States for up to one year. 
620. James Cole, (Deputy Attorney General of the United States), 
STRENGTHENING PRIVACY RIGHTS AND NATIONAL SECURITY: OVERSIGHT OF FISA SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2013, 52. Section 215 of the PATRIOT Act has been renewed 

RIGHTS AND NATIONAL SECURITY: 	OVERSIGHT OF FISA 	several times since the program was initiated - including most recently for an 

SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2013, 56-57. Using the Zazi case, once FBI confirmed Zazi's identity, they passed NSA his phone number, for which NSA then made a determination of --Reasonable Articulable Suspicion‖, and used the number to search the 215 database. Based on that search NSA analysts discovered a previously unknown number in communication with Zazi for a man named Adis Medunjanin. While FBI had previously been aware of Medunjanin, the direct and recent connection to Zazi as well as another us-based extremist focused the FBI's attention on him as a key lead in the plot. as you know, both Zazi and Medunjanin have been convicted for their role in the plot. 
613. John Inglis, (Dir., National Security Agency), STRENGTHENING PRIVACY 
additional four years in 2011. In connection with the recent renewals of 215 
authority, the government provided a classified briefing paper to the House and Senate Intelligence Committees to be made available to all Members of Congress. That briefing paper set out the operation of the program in detail, explained that the government and the FISC had interpreted section 215 to authorize the bulk collection of telephone metadata, and stated that the government was collecting such information. We also made offers to brief any member on the 215 program. 
621. John Yoo, (Prof., Law, U. California at Berkeley Law School), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Summer 2014, 927-928. Courts have never opposed a President's authority to engage in warrantless electronic surveillance 

RIGHTS AND NATIONAL SECURITY: 	OVERSIGHT OF FISA 	to protect national security. When the Supreme Court first considered this question in 

SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2013, 55. The second program, which we undertake through court orders under Section 215 of the Patriot Act, authorizes the collection of telephone metadata only. It does not allow the government to listen to anyone's phone calls. This program was specifically developed to allow the USG to detect communications between known or suspected terrorists who are operating outside the U.S. who are communicating with potential operatives inside the U.S., a gap highlighted by the attacks of 9/11. In a phrase this program is focused on detecting terrorist plots that cross the seam between foreign terrorist organizations and the US home/and. We have previously cited in public testimony, that section 215 made a contribution to 12 of the 13 terror plots with a US nexus, amongst the 54 world-wide plots cited earlier. 
614. John Inglis, (Dir., National Security Agency), STRENGTHENING PRIVACY 
1972, it held that the Fourth Amendment required a judicial warrant if a President 
wanted to conduct surveillance of a purely domestic group, but it refused to address surveillance of foreign threats to national security. In the years since, every federal appeals court to address the question, including the FISA Appeals Court, has --held that the President did have inherent authority to conduct warrantless searches to obtain foreign intelligence information.‖ The FISA Appeals Court did not even feel that it was worth much discussion. It took the President's power to do so --for granted,‖ and observed that --FISA could not encroach on the President's 
constitutional power.‖ 
622. Administration White Paper, BULK COLLECTION OF TELEPHONY 
METADATA UNDER SECTION 215 OF THE USA PATRIOT ACT, Aug. 9, 2013, 1. Multiple FISC judges have found that Section 215 authorizes the collection of 

RIGHTS AND NATIONAL SECURITY: 	OVERSIGHT OF FISA 	telephony metadata in bulk. Section 215 permits the FBI to seek a court order 

SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2013, 55. In considering operational value [of Section 215 of FISA], it is important to begin with an understanding of the problem the government is trying to solve. It is simply this: If we have intelligence indicating that a foreign-based terrorist organization is plotting an act of terror against the homeland, how would we determine whether there is, in fact, a connection between persons operating overseas and operatives within the US? Many will recall that the inability of the US intelligence community to make such a connection between 9/11 hijacker Al Midhar operating in California and an Al Qaeda safe house in Yemen, which was discussed by the 9/11 commission report. NSA had in fact collected the Yemen end of their communications but due to the nature of our collection, had no way of determining the number or the location of Al Midhar on the other end. 
directing a business or other entity to produce records or documents when there are 
reasonable grounds to believe that the information sought is relevant to an authorized investigation of international terrorism. 
623. David Lungren, (U.S. Representative, California), NOTRE DAME JOURNAL 
OF LAW, ETHICS & PUBLIC POLICY, 2012, 442-443. Section 215 of the PATRIOT Act amended the business records section of FISA to authorize the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation or his or her designee to apply to the FISA Court in order to obtain an order granting intelligence officials access to "any tangible things" (including books, records, papers, and other documents) no matter who holds it in foreign intelligence, international terrorism, and clandestine intelligence cases. The applicable standard adopted by Congress in the 2005-06 reauthorization required "a statement of facts showing that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the tangible things sought are relevant to the authorized 
investigation." 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	63 
 
 
624. Steven Bradbury, (Attorney, Dechert, LLP), THE ADMINISTRATION'S USE 
OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 107. I would stress, however, that section 215 is more restrictive than the Constitution demands, because it requires the approval of a federal judge. In this way, Congress in the PATRIOT Act adopted a requirement for judicial review and approval of FISA business records orders that is more protective of privacy and civil liberties interests than the Constitution would otherwise demand. And while the 215 order for metadata is extraordinary in terms of the amount of data acquired, it's also extraordinarily narrow and focused in terms of the strict limitations placed on accessing the data at the back end. 
625. Paul Rosenzweig, (Former Assistant Dir. for Policy, Dept. of Homeland 
Security), PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 50. Greenwald's principal complaint is that oversight of surveillance activity is inadequate. It must have been slightly embarrassing to have written that on the same day that the D.C. Circuit demonstrated the robustness of judicial oversight by limiting the use of GPS tracking surveillance systems. 
626. Paul Rosenzweig, (Former Assistant Dir. for Policy, Dept. of Homeland 
Security), PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 50. Perhaps Greenwald sees court oversight as separate and apart from other institutions of control - but that would be a mistake. What we have seen, since September 11, is the growth of a robust and complex system of oversight and regulation of surveillance activity with many elements. It includes: courts that are willing to overturn executive branch action; investigative and legislative Congressional activity; the growth of investigative journalism in the blogosphere; the rise of the public interest groups (who are, in effect, the --canary in the mineshaft,‖ serving as an early warning system of abuse); and a more empowered and aware public. 
627. James Cole, (Deputy Attorney General of the United States), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 7. As we have explained before, the 11 judges on the FISA court are far from rubber stamps. Instead, they review all of our pleadings thoroughly. They question us, and they don't sign off until they are satisfied that we have met all statutory and constitutional requirements. 
628. Administration White Paper, BULK COLLECTION OF TELEPHONY 
METADATA UNDER SECTION 215 OF THE USA PATRIOT ACT, Aug. 9, 2013, 2. Moreover, information concerning the use of Section 215 to collect telephony metadata in bulk was made available to all Members of Congress, and Congress reauthorized Section 215 without change after this information was provided. It is significant to the legal analysis of the statute that Congress was on notice of this 
activity and of the source of its legal authority when the statute was reauthorized. 
629. James Cole, (Deputy Attorney General of the United States), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 7. But suffice it to say that there are many restrictions imposed on NSA to ensure that only properly trained analysts may access the data and that they can only access it with reasonable, articulable suspicion as a predicate and when it has been met and documented. The documentation of the analysts' justification is important. It exists so that it can be reviewed by supervisors before the search is done and audited afterwards to ensure compliance with the court's orders. 
630. Rachel Brand, (Member, Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board), 
EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 188. As the Board discusses, there have been lapses in compliance with the program's limitations. Most of these violations have been minor and technical. A few have been significant, though apparently unintentional. Compliance problems are always a matter of concern and demonstrate the need for robust oversight. But it is important to remember that the lapses the Board mentions came to light only because the government self reported violations to the FISC. Those problems were then corrected, under the supervision of the FISC. And these corrective measures and self-reporting occurred before these programs were publicly disclosed. That is, they were identified and fixed not because of the scrutiny brought about by an unlawful leak of classified information, but because existing oversight mechanisms worked. 
631. Richard Clarke et al. (Chair, President's Review Group on Intelligence and 
Communications Technologies), LIBERTY AND SECURITY IN A CHANGING WORLD, Dec. 12, 2013, 97. What this means, in effect, is that specified service providers must turn over to the government on an ongoing basis call records for every telephone call made in, to, or from the United States through their respective systems. NSA retains the bulk telephony meta-data for a period of five years. The meta-data are then purged automatically from NSA's systems on a rolling basis. As it currently exists, the section 215 program acquires a very large amount of telephony meta-data each day, but what it collects represents only a small percentage of the total telephony meta-data held by service providers. Importantly, in 2011 NSA abandoned a similar meta-data program for Internet communications. 
632. Margot Kaminski, (Prof., Law, Ohio State U. College of Law), UNIVERSITY 
OF RICHMOND LAW REVIEW, Jan. 2015, 515. In response to the FBI's Library Awareness Program from the 1970s, nearly every state passed some sort of library record confidentiality statute. In 2013, Arizona explicitly added e-book protection to their library records statute. California's reader privacy statute extends to digital privacy. At the federal level, the VPPA and the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 both provide some protection for people consuming media. 
633. David Lungren, (U.S. Representative, California), NOTRE DAME JOURNAL 
OF LAW, ETHICS & PUBLIC POLICY, 2012, 447-448. In considering the safeguards built into section 215, it must also be remembered that the privacy interests of innocent Americans are protected under the USA PATRIOT Improvement and Reauthorization Act of 2005 as a result of the required minimization standards which apply to section 215. These procedures are intended to limit the collection and dissemination of non-publicly available information relating to United States persons. The purpose of the PATRIOT Act is to prevent another cataclysmic event like that which occurred on 9/11. This has nothing to do with spying on innocent Americans, and the protections built into section 215, along with minimization requirements, reinforce that objective. 


634. Ellen Nakashima, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, Feb. 4, 2015, A2. Under the new measures, the FBI will lift indefinite gag orders on companies that receive administrative subpoenas, known as national security letters. NSLs are issued by a senior law enforcement official without a judge's sign-off and require the recipient to turn over data such as a customer's credit-card transactions, billing records and data on when and to whom an e-mail was sent or a phone call made. The gag order will now be dropped after three years or when an investigation ends, whichever comes first. The three-year limit on NSL gag orders "is a significant concession" by the FBI, but it "does not meet the constitutional standard," said Gregory Nojeim, senior counsel for the Center for Democracy & Technology. "Instead, the FBI should have to go to court and prove a likelihood of harm" if disclosure was allowed from the start. 
635. SAN JOSE MERCURY NEWS, Jan. 17, 2014. Retrieved Apr. 14, 2015 from 
Nexis. Seeking to calm a furor over U.S. surveillance, President Barack Obama on 
Friday called for ending the government's control of phone data from hundreds of millions of Americans and immediately ordered intelligence agencies to get a secretive court's permission before accessing such records. 
636. Sari Horwitz, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, Jan. 22, 2014, A1. In a speech last 
week, Obama put the Justice Department and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence in charge of developing a plan by March 28 to transfer control of the massive database of records away from the National Security Agency - a step aimed at addressing widespread privacy concerns. But even among U.S. officials who applauded the recommendation in principle, there is a growing worry that the president's goals are unattainable in the near future, officials said. Telephone companies have said they do not want to be responsible for the database, and no one has come up with a workable idea for how a third party could hold the records. 
637. Margo Schlanger, (Prof., Law, U. Michigan), HARVARD NATIONAL 
SECURITY JOURNAL, 2015, 119-120. The President himself responded to a question about surveillance at a press conference: --just because we can do something doesn't mean we necessarily should.‖ What will result is still unclear. But Presidential Policy Directive 28, the most definite policy document thus far, signals the possibility of some new, more liberty-protective, surveillance rules. PPD-28 also promises several reforms that take quite a different approach. Rather than announcing new rules, the relevant provisions specify an internal organizational strategy; they designate actors and processes to facilitate fuller internal consideration of the --should‖ question, down the line. 
638. White House Press Release, ENDING THE 215 BULK TELEPHONY 
METADATA PROGRAM, Mar. 27, 2014. Retrieved Feb. 6, 2015 from http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/03/27/fact-sheet-administration-s-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/03/27/fact-sheet-administration-s-]proposal-ending-section-215-bulk-telephony-m. Under the President's proposal, a new program would be created with the following key attributes: the government will not collect these telephone records in bulk; rather, the records would remain at the telephone companies for the length of time they currently do today; absent an emergency situation, the government would obtain the records only pursuant to individual orders from the FISC approving the use of specific numbers for such queries, if a judge agrees based on national security concerns; the records provided to 
the government in response to queries would only be within two hops of the selection 
term being used, and the government's handling of any records it acquires will be governed by minimization procedures approved by the FISC; the court-approved numbers could be used to query the data over a limited period of time without returning to the FISC for approval, and the production of records would be ongoing and prospective; and the companies would be compelled by court order to provide technical assistance to ensure that the records can be queried and that results are transmitted to the government in a usable format and in a timely manner. 
639. Steven Titch, (Associate Fellow, R Street Institute), HAS NSA POISONED 
THE CLOUD?, Jan. 2014, 2. More recently, on Jan. 17, President Barack Obama announced steps to curtail the NSA's surveillance programs, but stopped well short of suspending them. Obama announced the government would no longer maintain a database of millions of Americans' telephone records, which had been conducted under the auspices of Section 215 of the Patriot Act, but said telecommunications companies or an independent third party could continue to maintain that data, and did not rule out mandating that companies do so. The president also said the White House would not support the FISA Improvements Act, which would codify into law the NSA's authority to conduct many of its existing surveillance programs, as well as endorsing creating a role for independent advocates at the FISA court and conducting an annual review of the court's declassified decisions. 
640. INVESTOR'S BUSINESS DAILY, Jan. 21, 2014, A1. Seeking to calm a furor 
over U.S. surveillance, President Obama on Friday called for ending the government's control of phone data from hundreds of millions of Americans and immediately ordered intelligence agencies to get a secretive court's permission before accessing such records. Still, he defended the spying apparatus overall, saying the intelligence community is not "cavalier" about civil liberties. Obama also ordered intelligence agencies to stop spying on allies' leaders and called for extending some privacy protections to foreigners whose communications are scooped up by the U.S. 
641. Ellen Nakashima, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, Feb. 4, 2015, A2. The Obama 
administration on Tuesday announced a series of modest steps to strengthen privacy protections for Americans and foreigners in U.S. intelligence-gathering, including an end to the indefinite gag order on certain subpoenas issued to companies for customers' personal data. At the same time, U.S. intelligence officials said they were still hoping to fulfill a goal President Obama set a year ago: ending the National Security Agency's collection of millions of Americans' phone records. 
642. Barack Obama, (President's Speech on NSA Surveillance), THE NEW YORK 
TIMES, Jan. 18, 2014. Retrieved Apr. 14, 2015 from Nexis. For all these reasons, I believe we need a new approach. I am therefore ordering a transition that will end the Section 215 bulk metadata program as it currently exists, and establish a mechanism that preserves the capabilities we need without the government holding this bulk metadata. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	64 
 
 
643. Barack Obama, (President's Speech on NSA Surveillance), THE NEW YORK 
TIMES, Jan. 18, 2014. Retrieved Apr. 14, 2015 from Nexis. Because of the challenges involved, I've ordered that the transition away from the existing program will proceed in two steps. Effective immediately, we will only pursue phone calls that are two steps removed from a number associated with a terrorist organization instead of the current three. And I have directed the Attorney General to work with the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court so that during this transition period, the database can be queried only after a judicial finding or in the case of a true emergency. 
644. Ellen Nakashima, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, Jan. 18, 2014, A1. In a 
speech at the Justice Department, Obama ordered several immediate steps to limit the NSA program that collects domestic phone records, one of the surveillance practices that was exposed last year by former intelligence contractor Edward Snowden. Obama directed that from now on, the government must obtain a court order for each phone number it wants to query in its database of records. Analysts will be able to review phone calls that are two steps removed from a number associated with a terrorist organization instead of three. And he ordered a halt to eavesdropping on dozens of foreign leaders and governments that are friends or allies. 
645. White House Press Release, ENDING THE 215 BULK TELEPHONY 
METADATA PROGRAM, Mar. 27, 2014. Retrieved Feb. 6, 2015 from http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/03/27/fact-sheet-administration-s-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/03/27/fact-sheet-administration-s-]proposal-ending-section-215-bulk-telephony-m. Legislation will be needed to implement the President's proposal. The Administration has been in consultation with congressional leadership and members of the Intelligence and Judiciary Committees 
on this important issue throughout the last year, and we look forward to continuing to 
work with Congress to pass a bill that achieves the goals the President has put forward. Given that this legislation will not be in place by March 28 and given the importance of maintaining the capabilities in question, the President has directed DOJ to seek from the FISC a 90-day reauthorization of the existing program, which includes the substantial modifications in effect since February. 
646. Fred Kaplan, (Fellow, Council on Foreign Relations), SALT LAKE TRIBUNE, 
Jan. 20, 2014. Retrieved Apr. 20, 2015 from Nexis. Another eye-catching reform, which the commission did not propose but Obama or someone at the White House devised on his own (and does not require an act of Congress), is to cut the number of "hops" that the NSA can make, in fanning out its surveillance, from three to two. This is a bigger deal than it might seem. Metadata analysis tracks traffic patterns in phone calls. Let's say the analysis reveals that someone - an American - has called the phone number of a known al-Qaida member. And let's also say this person has phoned 100 people in the last five years. The NSA can start tracking not only the suspicious American's calls but also the calls of those other 100 people. That's the first hop. Let's say that each of those 100 people also called 100 people. The NSA can track all of their calls, too. That's the second hop, and it puts (100 times 100) 10,000 people on the agency's screen. In the third hop, the NSA can trace the calls of those 10,000 people and the calls of all the people those 10,000 people called - or (10,000 times 100) - 1 million people. In other words, Obama's reform - which he said takes effect immediately - cuts the number of people who come under surveillance as the result of tracking a single suspicious person, if you use my example, from 1 million to 10,000. 
647. Fred Kaplan, (Fellow, Council on Foreign Relations), SALT LAKE TRIBUNE, 
Jan. 20, 2014. Retrieved Apr. 20, 2015 from Nexis. In practical terms, this isn't such a big deal, for now. During their investigation, the commissioners asked NSA officials how often they actually make a third hop in their traces. Their reply: almost never. Still, the reform places another limit on potential abuse in the future. 
648. Steven Bradbury, (Attorney & Former Head of the Office of Legal Counsel, 
U.S. Dept. of Justice), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA 
AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 141. The President has also ordered that the NSA not analyze calling records out to the third --hop‖ from the seed number. This change, too, poses a significant risk of diminishing the speed, flexibility, and utility of the program, since, as I understand it, the NSA currently analyzes third-hop data only where the Agency identifies a specific intelligence reason for doing so. Why needlessly prevent the NSA from pursuing valid and potentially important intelligence leads or interpose a new requirement of court 
approval before the NSA may do so? 
649. White House Press Release, ENDING THE 215 BULK TELEPHONY 
METADATA PROGRAM, Mar. 27, 2014. Retrieved Feb. 6, 2015 from http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/03/27/fact-sheet-administration-s-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/03/27/fact-sheet-administration-s-]proposal-ending-section-215-bulk-telephony-m. On January 17, 2014, the President directed the first step in the transition of the Section 215 program; that the Department of Justice (DOJ) to seek to modify the program to ensure that: Absent an emergency situation, the government can query the telephony metadata collected pursuant to the program only after a judge approves the use of specific numbers for 
such queries based on national security concerns; and The results of any query are 
limited to metadata within two hops of the selection term being used, instead of three. On February 5, 2014, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) approved the government's request to modify the program. 
650. Brian Owsley, (Prof., Law, Indiana Tech Law School), HASTINGS LAW 
JOURNAL, Dec. 2014, 191. Cell site simulators are being used more and more by intelligence agencies around the world, not just in the United States. Although the Harris Corporation is one of the major producers of these devices, these days, a reasonably bright computer whiz with $1,500 can buy the raw components to make one. 

651. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 5. Governments with significant financial resources, however, have owned and used cellular phone surveillance equipment for quite some time. Indeed, for nearly two decades, U.S. federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies have employed sophisticated cellular surveillance equipment that exploits vulnerabilities in cellular networks. Once only accessible to a few global powers at six-figure prices, similar technology is now available to any government - including those with a history of spying in the United States - and to any other interested buyer from surveillance companies around the world, often for as little as a few thousand dollars per device. Moreover, hobbyists can now build less advanced but functional interception equipment for as little as $100. The normal course of economics and innovation has destroyed the monopoly a select group of global powers once enjoyed over digital cellular surveillance technology, rendering surreptitious access to cellular communications as universally available as it once was in the analog world. Surveillance has, once again, become democratized, this time with a much more expansive set of capabilities. 
652. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 5- 6. Although the technology has changed, we are rapidly approaching a future of widespread interception that feels like the past, but with a much larger range of public and private actors with more diverse motives for snooping. Whoever employs this technology can obtain direct, unmediated access to information about and from a cellular phone without any aid from a wireless provider. In some cases, this technology can even intercept the contents of cellular phone calls, text messages, and other communications data transmitted to and from the phone. 
653. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 8- 9. Because cellular telephones send signals through the air, cellular communications are inherently vulnerable to interception by many more parties than communications carried over a copper wire or fiber optic cable into a home or business. This increased exposure to interception exists because anyone wishing to tap a traditional wireline telephone call must physically access the network infrastructure transporting that call - such as by attaching interception equipment to the telephone wires outside the home of the target or at the telephone company's central office. In contrast, intercepting a cellular telephone call only requires sufficient geographic proximity to the handset of one of the callers and the right kind of wireless interception equipment. 
654. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 9. Cellular telephone calls can, of course, be intercepted by government agencies with the assistance of the wireless carriers via government-mandated interception capabilities these companies have built into their networks. In fact, the vast majority of surveillance performed by law enforcement agencies in the United States is, almost certainly, carrier-assisted surveillance. But cellular phone transmissions can also be captured without the assistance, or even the knowledge, of the carriers. The unmediated nature of this kind of interception, combined with the growing ease of access to cellular surveillance technology, makes the universe of private parties that can intercept a cellular call inestimably larger, and the range of their motives correspondingly broader, than the pool of potential law enforcement and national security actors who have both the legal capacity and technical capability to initiate a traditional wiretap of a wireline phone. 
655. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 11. Active surveillance, performed with a device known as an International Mobile Subscriber Identity (--IMSI‖) catcher or cell site simulator, works by impersonating a wireless base transceiver station - the carrier-owned equipment installed at a cell tower to which cellular phones connect - and tricking the target's phone into connecting to it. For some surveillance capabilities, such as intercepting communications content, the IMSI catcher can also impersonate the carrier's network infrastructure, such that calls and text messages are transmitted through the IMSI catcher, once again without disrupting the communication and thus remaining imperceptible to the target. Depending on the particular features of the surveillance device and how they are configured by the operator, IMSI catchers can be used to identify nearby phones, locate them with extraordinary precision, intercept outgoing calls and text messages, as well as block service, either to all devices in the area or to particular devices. 
656. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 16. Law enforcement agencies perform most cellular surveillance with the assistance of telecommunications and Internet companies. This method of surveillance uses carrier-owned equipment or technology that enables surveillance - typically with the aid of dedicated electronic surveillance and compliance teams employed by these companies. For more than one hundred years, the telephone companies have provided such assistance. While carrier-performed or enabled surveillance is generally the easiest, most efficient, and most covert way to intercept communications, it is not the only way. 
657. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 16-17. In spite of the user-friendly, often inexpensive surveillance capabilities provided to the government by wireless carriers, there are certain situations where governments may need or prefer to engage in direct, unmediated surveillance of telephones themselves using an active or passive device. 
658. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 17. Law enforcement can determine the specific phone used by a particular surveillance target by deploying an IMSI catcher to collect data about nearby phones at multiple locations, such as the target's home and place of business. This method ultimately narrows the search to only those phones that were present in all of the monitored locations. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	65 
 
 
659. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 19. Some prisons, for example, have installed devices that permit access to registered phones, such as those used by guards and other staff, while blocking all unregistered phones, such as those smuggled into the facility, from making or receiving calls. Law enforcement agencies may also, during high-security events like a hostage situation or a bomb threat, seek to redirect outgoing numbers dialed by particular phones or block incoming calls to all nearby phones. 
660. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 19. U.S. law enforcement agencies have used cellular surveillance technology for more than two decades and spent tens of millions of dollars acquiring these devices at federal, state, and local levels. 
661. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 23-24. A document published by the DOJ in 1997, initially distributed nationally to prosecutors and later published on the DOJ's website, is the earliest publicly available DOJ document that describes the capabilities of passive and active wireless phone surveillance technology. The document also discusses, again for the first time, the legal policies governing the technology's use by federal law enforcement agents. In this document, the DOJ took the position that, as long as (1) law enforcement agents were not intercepting communications content and (2) the acquisition of the non-content data did not involve the assistance of carriers, --it does not appear that there are constitutional or statutory constraints on the warrantless use of [an active or 
passive surveillance] device.‖ 
662. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 41. The first generation of cellular interception technology was introduced during the early-1990s. Generally, it was expensive and sold by a few defense contractors only to major global powers. Today, however, both passive and active surveillance devices are much cheaper and available on the open market from surveillance vendors in the Middle East, South America, and Asia. The major powers thus no longer enjoy a monopoly over cellular phone surveillance. It has become, for better or for worse, irreversibly globalized. 
663. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 45. Government officials later acknowledged that over forty different makes and models of cellular interception technology had been imported from over a dozen vendors. The devices had been purchased by numerous national governmental agencies, state governments, and the military. Officials estimate that thousands of cellular interception devices have been imported, and that hundreds are in the possession of private parties, such as corporations and detective agencies. 
664. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 46. The effective monopoly over cellular interception technology long enjoyed by governments was largely due to the cost. Devices retail for as much as $400,000, depending on the features - far too expensive for the average person, but a relatively small sum for the military, intelligence community, and even many law enforcement agencies. Part of the high price reflected the difficulty and significant capital investment required to design and manufacture the StingRay's sophisticated radio equipment. As a result, hobbyists and researchers without large budgets were simply unable to develop cellular communications technology. This cost barrier no longer exists. Moreover, a set of free software tools has been developed by a community of researchers and hobbyists that has lowered the skill level necessary to tinker with cellular communication technology. Consequently, as the cost and ease of developing cellular interception technology has declined, the longstanding nation-state monopoly has vanished. Surveillance has become democratized and, correspondingly, the motives for surveillance have multiplied. 
665. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 47. Hobbyists can now build their own active surveillance devices with readily available electronic components currently costing approximately $700. The ability to create such low-cost cellular interception devices is due to technological innovations that have lowered both the costs and skill-level necessary to develop radio technology. 
666. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 51. Predictably, cryptography researchers have repeatedly discovered critical security flaws in the encryption algorithms designed and deployed by the cellular industry. Such flaws can be exploited to decipher the encrypted cellular signals captured with passive monitoring equipment. Moreover, even after researchers demonstrated that these encryption algorithms are vulnerable to interception, the cellular industry - including major U.S. wireless carriers - continues to use them, perhaps because of the significant cost of upgrading to newer, more secure technology. 
667. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 54. Passive interception technology that once cost tens of thousands of dollars can now be built at home for as little as $15. Similarly, whereas cellular interception was once a black art practiced by those in the intelligence community, today, professors assign the task of decrypting cellular communications to their computer science students. 
668. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 55. The U.S. and other select global powers no longer enjoy a domestic monopoly over the use of cellular interception technology. Accordingly, a much larger number of hostile foreign intelligence services can and, almost certainly, are using the technology in this country for espionage. Similarly, if cellular interception technology is not already in use by criminals, the paparazzi, and tech-savvy creepy neighbors, it is only a matter of time before they acquire and use it too. This Part discusses these current and possible future threats. 

669. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 63-64. The United States faces a serious cybersecurity threat. Foreign governments, such as China, have repeatedly hacked into the computer systems of government agencies and major U.S. companies, including technology firms and defense contractors, to steal intellectual property and classified information. James Clapper, the Director of National Intelligence, and James Comey, the Director of the FBI, have both told Congress that cyber attacks are the most serious national security threat faced by the United States. 
670. Stephanie Pell, (Prof., Cyber Ethics, U.S. Military Academy at West Point's 
Cyber Institute), HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Fall 2014, 67-68. The endemic insecurity of U.S. cellular communications networks is now front-page news. This increased attention from the media and policymakers is likely to result in action - whether in the form of legislation, regulation, or merely increased pressure on the cellular industry. 
671. Brian Owsley, (Prof., Law, Indiana Tech Law School), HASTINGS LAW 
JOURNAL, Dec. 2014, 185. In recent years, traditional and online media have raised concerns about a means of electronic surveillance employed by the government that has various colorful and ominous names: TriggerFish, StingRay, AmberJack, KingFish, LoggerHead, Gossamer, Harpoon, Hailstorm, International Mobile Subscriber Identifier (--IMSI‖) catcher, Electronic Serial Number (--ESN‖) reader, cell site simulator, or digital analyzer. 
672. Brian Owsley, (Prof., Law, Indiana Tech Law School), HASTINGS LAW 
JOURNAL, Dec. 2014, 185. In the course of various criminal investigations, the government seeks to utilize an electronic device known as a StingRay that acts as a cell site simulator. In other words, the device deceives nearby cell phones into believing that the device is a cell tower so that the cell phone's information is then downloaded into the cell site simulator. 
673. Brian Owsley, (Prof., Law, Indiana Tech Law School), HASTINGS LAW 
JOURNAL, Dec. 2014, 185-186. Imagine if you will, a federal agent sitting inside an unmarked van in a parking lot monitoring the activities of some subject of a criminal investigation. Inside the van the agent has an electronic surveillance device about the size of a bankers box connected to a laptop computer. With this device, the agent is targeting the subject's cell phone in a manner that the cell phone's number and other data, including, potentially, voice communications, can be downloaded. This is a great device for apprehending the bad guys. Unfortunately, this device is capturing similar information from all the cell phones in the surrounding area. So the person who lives nearby, the couple who are sitting in the coffee shop on the corner, and you as you drive by in your car - all of you are also having your cell phone information captured and downloaded into the agent's computer. 
674. Brian Owsley, (Prof., Law, Indiana Tech Law School), HASTINGS LAW 
JOURNAL, Dec. 2014, 186-187. This Article addresses the use of cell site simulators and makes three principal points. First, the government's current approach of relying on the pen register statute to justify its requests for court orders fails because cell site simulators are not pen registers and thus are not covered by the pen register statute. Second, the use of cell site simulators constitutes a Fourth Amendment search, which requires probable cause. Consequently, the proper approach is for the government to establish probable cause in order to obtain a search warrant consistent with the Fourth Amendment. Third, the use of the cell site simulators raises privacy concerns for third parties. 
675. Brian Owsley, (Prof., Law, Indiana Tech Law School), HASTINGS LAW 
JOURNAL, Dec. 2014, 189. Whenever any cellular phone is turned on, it sends out a signal seeking the closest cell site, which in turn will register that telephone with that cell site. --This process, called --registration,' occurs approximately every seven seconds,‖ enabling --cellular providers to obtain a plethora of information about the telephones contacting their cell-sites.‖ The Department of Justice (--DOJ‖) has explained that --to provide service to cellular telephones, providers have the technical capability to collect information such as the cell tower nearest to a particular cell phone, the portion of that tower facing the phone, and often the signal strength of the 
phone.‖ 
676. Ellen Nakashima, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, Jan. 8, 2014, A2. There are 
many obstacles to such a shift - not least the phone companies' stiff resistance. The companies have told the White House that they do not want to be made to hold the data on behalf of the government for periods longer than they normally would. And key senators have studied the idea, including the possibility of paying the companies to retain the data, and rejected it. The NSA's director, Gen. Keith Alexander, told the advisory panel, the Review Group on Intelligence and Communications Technologies, that the "NSA itself has seriously considered moving to a model in which the data are held by the private sector." But, according to a review group member, Alexander told the group that "no one else wanted it - especially not the phone companies." Alexander, the member said, "described it as a 'bit of a hot 
potato.'" 
677. Steven Bradbury, (Attorney & Former Head of the Office of Legal Counsel, 
U.S. Dept. of Justice), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA 
AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 127. I therefore strongly urge the Committee to avoid endorsing proposals for substantial modification of the NSA programs or FISA provisions. If reforms are adopted that would severely constrain the effectiveness and utility of the NSA programs, then Edward Snowden and his collaborators will have achieved their explicit objective of weakening the national security defenses and capabilities of the United States and diminishing the position of strength that America occupies in the world post-9/11. These harms to our national security would come with no significant corresponding enhancements to civil liberties. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	66 
 
 
 
678. Elisebeth Collins Cook, (Member, Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 193. Among other things, in today's world of multiple threats, a tool that allows investigators to triage and focus on those who are more likely to be doing harm to or in the United States is both good policy and potentially privacy-protective. Similarly, a tool that allows investigators to more fully understand our adversaries in a relatively nimble way, allows investigators to verify and reinforce intelligence gathered from other programs or tools, and provides --peace of mind,‖ has value. 
679. Robert Litt, (General Counsel, Office of the Director of National Intelligence), 
IC ON THE RECORD, Mar. 17, 2014. Retrieved Feb. 8, 2015 from http://icont  [HYPERLINK: http://icont/]
herecord.tumblr.com/post/79998577649/as-prepared-for-delivery-remarks-of-odni- 
general. Were we to announce to the world that we have the ability, for example, to intercept emails sent using particular email services, we would enable terrorists, cyber criminals, foreign intelligence officers and other foreign intelligence targets to 
migrate to other email services so that they could communicate without fear of 
detection. We may never know what we are missing until it is too late. 
680. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. The consensus view from interviews with current and former intelligence officials is that while metadata collection is useful, it is the least useful of the collection programs available to the intelligence community. If there was one surveillance program they had to give up, it would be 215, but this would not come without an increase in risk. Restricting metadata collection will make it harder to identify attacks and increase the time it takes to do this. 
681. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. This makes the critique of the 215 program like a critique of airbags in a car - you own a car for years, the airbags never deploy, so therefore they are useless and can be removed. The weakness in this argument is that discarding airbags would increase risk. How much risk would 
increase and whether other considerations outweigh this increased risk are 
fundamental problems for assessing surveillance programs. With the Section 215 program, Americans gave up a portion of their privacy in exchange for decreased risk. Eliminating 215 collection is like subtracting a few of the random pieces of the jigsaw puzzle. It decreases the chances that the analysts will be able to deduce what is actually going on and may increase the time it takes to do this. That means there is an increase in the risk of a successful attack. How much of an increase in risk is difficult to determine, but this is crucial for assessing the value of domestic surveillance programs. 
682. Bob Goodlatte, (Chair, House Judiciary Comm.), EXAMINING 
RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 2. We need to look no further than last month's Target breach or last week's Yahoo breach to know that private information held by private companies is susceptible to cyber attacks. And transferring storage to private companies would require the Government to request data from multiple companies to connect the dots it currently stores, thereby complicating its ability to quickly and efficiently compile valuable intelligence. 
683. Bob Goodlatte, (Chair, House Judiciary Comm.), EXAMINING 
RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 2. The 5-year storage of bulk metadata by the NSA is arguably the most critical and the most controversial aspect of the Section 215 program. But transferring storage to private companies could raise more privacy concerns than it solves. 
684. Steven Bradbury, (Attorney & Former Head of the Office of Legal Counsel, 
U.S. Dept. of Justice), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA 
AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 140-141. Today the database is locked down and kept secure and segregated by the NSA in the basement of Fort Meade. If the database were outsourced to a private contractor, it would in all likelihood be housed off-site, probably in some suburban office park, and it would certainly be kept on less secure servers. In that event, the database would be far more vulnerable to privacy breaches and cyber incursions from foreign governments, terrorist groups, criminal organizations, and sophisticated hackers. Furthermore, unless Congress provided otherwise by statute, the data would be exposed to court-ordered discovery by private litigants in all manner of civil lawsuits. The private contractors with access to the database would also be much less subject to effective oversight by the executive branch, the FISA court, and Congress. Any such arrangement involving a third-party contractor, therefore, would be distinctly less efficient, less secure, and less subject to effective oversight than the current program. That result cannot be a desirable one, both in terms of national security and in terms of the privacy of the data and the potential for its abuse. 
685. Ronald Sievert, (Prof., Government, U. Texas), NATIONAL SECURITY LAW 
JOURNAL, 2014, 95. President Obama may have solved the immediate crisis posed by metadata collection by directing that separate phone companies maintain the data instead of the NSA and that they provide access only upon receiving a subpoena or court order. This of course will impede the government, as it will take time to contact the numerous distinct phone companies and Internet Service Providers. 
686. Steven Bradbury, (Attorney & Former Head of the Office of Legal Counsel, 
U.S. Dept. of Justice), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA 
AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 140. The current program enables the NSA to acquire all of the telephone metadata on an ongoing basis from several companies in order to preserve the data in a segregated and secure manner and combine it together in a form that is efficiently usable and searchable. Ceding control of the combined database to the phone companies would presumably require the involvement of a private, third-party contractor to house and manage the data, since no single phone company has the ability or inclination to maintain and aggregate all of the data of the several companies and host the data on servers for a sufficient period of years in a searchable form. 


687. Bob Goodlatte, (Chair, House Judiciary Comm.), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 2-3. Of equal importance is the impact such a storage mandate would have on the ability of American companies to compete in a global market. American technology companies are experiencing a lack of customer trust and a loss of international business as a result of the Snowden leaks, based upon the fear that information about their customers is readily and routinely turned over to the American Government. I suspect requiring these companies to now house the data specifically so the Government can access it will only reinforce those fears. 
688. Steven Bradbury, (Attorney & Former Head of the Office of Legal Counsel, 
U.S. Dept. of Justice), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA 
AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 139. The most sweeping change under consideration, as I understand it, would restrict the government's authority under section 215 to acquiring on an item-by-item basis only those individual business records, including telephone call-detail records, that directly pertain to the person who is the subject of the counterterrorism investigation. A variation on this proposal would limit the NSA to conducting one-by-one queries of the call-detail databases of the phone companies only while the data is retained by the companies in the ordinary course of business. Such requirements would kill the NSA's telephone metadata program, because they would, by design, deny the NSA the broad field of data needed to conduct in an efficient and workable manner the link analysis and contact chaining that is enabled by the current program. 
689. John Bates, (U.S. District Court Judge), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 196. Drastically expanding the FISC's caseload by assigning to it in excess of 20,000 administrative subpoena-type cases per year - even with a corresponding injection of resources and personnel - would fundamentally transform the nature of the FISC to the detriment of its current responsibilities. 
690. Steven Bradbury, (Attorney & Former Head of the Office of Legal Counsel, 
U.S. Dept. of Justice), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA 
AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 141. Another proposal recommended by the Review Group and reflected in some bills pending in Congress would require prior FlSA court approval for querying the telephone metadata - in other words, a prior court determination that there is reasonable articulable suspicion that the phone number to be queried against the database is associated with one of the specified foreign terrorist organizations. The President has ordered the NSA to put in place some version of this proposal, subject to the Attorney General's working out acceptable procedures in consultation with the FISA judges. Depending on how it's implemented, such a requirement would place a significant and potentially unwieldy restraint on the speed and flexibility of the program, particularly if it requires one-by-one court approval of each query, and will likely place a substantial new burden on the operations of the FISA court. If applied to the --hops‖ from the original seed number, for example, this requirement of prior court approval would throttle the utility of the program entirely. 
691. John Bates, (U.S. District Court Judge), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO REFORM FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 195. The participation of a privacy advocate is unnecessary and could prove counterproductive in the vast majority of FISA matters, which involve the application of a probable cause or other factual standard to case-specific facts and typically implicate the privacy interests of few persons other than the specific target. Given the nature of FISA proceedings, the participation of an advocate would neither create a truly adversarial process nor constructively assist the Courts in assessing the facts, as the advocate would be unable to communicate with the target or conduct an independent investigation. Advocate involvement in run-of-the-mill FISA matters would substantially hamper the work of the Courts without providing any commensurate benefit in terms of privacy protection or otherwise; indeed, such pervasive participation could actually undermine the Courts' ability to receive complete and accurate information on the matters before them. 
692. Steven Bradbury, (Attorney & Former Head of the Office of Legal Counsel, 
U.S. Dept. of Justice), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA 
AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 142. This concept of introducing a Public Advocate with independent authority and appeal powers into the FISA process raises serious constitutional concerns. Because the review of FISA applications requires access to the most sensitive national security information, including both current threat assessments and descriptions of the proposed intelligence operations, any appointed advocate would have to be a permanent, trusted officer of the executive branch or of the FISA court with the necessary security clearances. Constitutional issues would arise in any statutory mandate that the President invariably permit the Public Advocate to have access to such sensitive classified information. The protection of national security secrets is a duty the Constitution assigns exclusively to the President; Congress may not direct the exercise of this duty by statute. Constitutional issues would also follow if the Public Advocate were given the power to appeal a decision of the FISA court over the objections of the executive branch. 
693. Steven Bradbury, (Attorney & Former Head of the Office of Legal Counsel, 
U.S. Dept. of Justice), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA 
AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 143. Moreover, introducing such an advocate position would not likely achieve the meaningful benefits that proponents hope for. The judges assigned to the FISA court are already assisted by permanent legal advisers who are steeped in the precedents of the court and whose job is to second guess the arguments and analyses of the executive branch. If a particular FlSA application raises significant questions, the legal advisers are already asked to prepare separate, in-depth analyses for the judges. The recently disclosed opinions of the FISA court convincingly show that the judges of the court and their legal advisers are not shy about applying a thoroughly independent review of the issues that is in no way beholding to the executive branch. If a Public Advocate were part of the executive branch, the advocate would always ultimately be answerable to the President. If employed by the court, the advocate would be little different from the existing legal advisers. Either way, the Public Advocate could never actually be a true independent adversary representing the interests of those under surveillance. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	67 
 
 
 
694. Steven Bradbury, (Attorney & Former Head of the Office of Legal Counsel, U.S. Dept. of Justice), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA 
AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 143-144. Furthermore, it must be recognized that any requirement that the panel of outside amici be granted access to classified information will have the potential to chill the executive branch's willingness to share the sensitive details of national security operations and intelligence information relevant to particular FISA applications. As Judge John Bates recently pointed out in his letter on behalf of all current and former judges of the FISA court, such a disincentive would threaten to hamper the important relationship of trust and confidence that currently exists between the National Security Division of the Justice Department and the FISA court. It should be a top priority of this Committee to avoid that result. 
695. Steven Bradbury, (Attorney & Former Head of the Office of Legal Counsel, 
U.S. Dept. of Justice), EXAMINING RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM FISA 
AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearings, Feb. 4, 2014, 144. One final observation that I believe is important to keep in mind: Many of the reform proposals discussed above, including those that would attempt to convert the FISA process into an adversary proceeding and those that would impose more frequent judicial approvals or bureaucratic processing of decisions heretofore made in real time by intelligence analysts, would run the risk of recreating the type of cumbersome, over- lawyered foreign intelligence regime that proved so inadequate in the face of 9/11. 
696. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]
tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. It is also likely that consumers 
are more comfortable with trading personal data for Internet services than the privacy debate would indicate. In practice, people routinely surrender data in exchange for a new app or service, and while it is legitimate to say many are not fully aware of the trades they are making, greater knowledge (and control) might not lead to radical changes in behavior. 
697. John Gilliom, (Prof., Political Science, Ohio U.), SUPERVISION: AN 
INTRODUCTION TO THE SURVEILLANCE SOCIETY, 2013, 8-9. It is incomplete to think of surveillance only as something forced on an unwilling populace. It certainly is that in many places and times, but we also have to acknowledge the surveillance programs that people sign up for, support, or even do to themselves. No one ordered us to get cell phones, but when we did, we logged ourselves in to one of the best surveillance networks ever devised. No one makes us post compromising photographs or other content on social networking sites, but for some reason we do. Our tendency to desire some types of surveillance is a fascinating dimension of the surveillance society. 
698. Newton Lee, (Former Staff Member, Institute for Defense Analysis), 
FACEBOOK NATION: TOTAL INFORMATION AWARENESS, 2013, 204. A saying commonly attributed to Benjamin Franklin goes like this, --Any society that would give up a little liberty to gain a little security will deserve neither and lose both.‖ The question is: Did we give up any personal freedom because of public CCTV, red light cameras, Google social search, or Facebook privacy settings? The answer is: No, not really. We do not hesitate to go to public places, drive around town, search for information on Google, and socialize with friends on Facebook and other social networks. 
699. John Gilliom, (Prof., Political Science, Ohio U.), SUPERVISION: AN 
INTRODUCTION TO THE SURVEILLANCE SOCIETY, 2013, 50. Most of us know, at least vaguely, that our online personas could come back to haunt us: that insulting thing you said about a classmate might not look so good when you're on a job interview (--I'm a team player‖) or running for public office someday (--We must return to civility‖). Beer pong pics that are loads of fun when you're twenty-one won't be such a hoot when you're twenty-eight and applying for a position with a top law firm or defense contractor. But most of us accept these downsides and provide all this information with little thought. One of the most surprising things about our emergent surveillance society is how we willingly flock to new forms of surveillance. A conventional expectation might be that the freedom-loving people of Western democracies would recoil at the totalitarian implications of corporate Big Brotherism. But no. Even though cell phones, Facebook, and Google are all highly advanced systems of surveillance, most of us eagerly throw ourselves into their arms. 
700. Newton Lee, (Former Staff Member, Institute for Defense Analysis), 
FACEBOOK NATION: TOTAL INFORMATION AWARENESS, 2013, 164. Absolute privacy is unattainable whenever we need to conduct business with a financial institution, an online shop, or a government agency. The Locker Project elaborates, --As we go through our lives we create vast amounts of data. Emails, phone calls, social network posts, photos, utility bills, health monitoring devices, text messages, browsing data, purchase receipts and more are all born out of the regular course of our actions. It's more than just data. It represents our actions, interests, intentions, communications, relationships, locations, behaviors and creative and consumptive efforts‖. 
701. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. Judging by their behavior, 
Internet users are willing to exchange private data for online services. A survey in a 
major European country found a majority of Internet users disapproved of Google out of privacy concerns, but more than 80 percent used Google as their search engine. The disconnect between consumer statements and behavior reduces the chances of legislating better protections. 

702. Lothar Determann, (Prof., Law, U. California's Hastings College of Law). 
HASTINGS CONSTITUTIONAL LAW QUARTERLY, May 2014, 28. Security interests and civil liberties must be carefully balanced. In this context, it is worth noting that to date the public has been largely embracing or tolerating charge-free online services, big data, and tracking; evidence is the rampant success of Web 2.0, social media, and the Internet of Things. Consumers and employees agree every day to share massive amounts of personal data via various forms of tracking and surveillance technologies with companies that notify consumers and employees they should not expect privacy. In such open, limited-privacy segments of cyberspace, the government seems justified to emphasize security and patrol virtual worlds like city roads and public places. 
703. Newton Lee, (Former Staff Member, Institute for Defense Analysis), 
FACEBOOK NATION: TOTAL INFORMATION AWARENESS, 2013, 15. By satisfying the insatiable desire for communication with others who seem to be willing to listen, people have voluntarily sacrificed some degrees of personal privacy. --Have one's cake and eat it too‖ does not apply to personal privacy in the world of ubiquitous social networks. 
704. Bill Keller, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, June 17, 2013, A17. And then there is 
the Internet. We seem pretty much at peace, verging on complacent, about the exploitation of our data for commercial, medical and scientific purposes - as trivial as the advertising algorithm that pitches us camping gear because we searched the Web for wilderness travel, as valuable as the digital record-sharing that makes sure all our doctors know what meds we're on. 
705. Theresa Payton & Theodore Claypoole, (Security Technology Expert/Chair, 
Cyberspace Mobile Commerce Subcommitteee, American Bar Association's Business Law Section), PRIVACY IN THE AGE OF BIG DATA: RECOGNIZING THREATS, DEFENDING YOUR RIGHTS, AND PROTECTING YOUR FAMILY, 2014, xiv. In some ways, our personal lives are even more improved by connected computing power than our work lives. Not long ago, you would have to wait for a weekday to check on the money in your bank accounts and to move funds from one account into another. In the past five years, smartphones and tablets have become ubiquitous, with millions of people carrying a powerful computer in their pockets that provides maps and information on demand, takes pictures, records sound, and quickly connects us to anyone we care about. There is no going back. This world is infinitely better than the one it replaced. But this does not mean that we should ignore the troubling issues raised by all of these technological wonders. 
706. Bill Keller, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, June 17, 2013, A17. In an online 
debate about the N.S.A. eavesdropping story the other day, Eric Posner, a professor at the University of Chicago Law School, pointed out that we have grown comfortable with the Internal Revenue Service knowing our finances, employees of government hospitals knowing our medical histories, and public-school teachers knowing the abilities and personalities of our children. --The information vacuumed up by the N.S.A. was already available to faceless bureaucrats in phone and Internet companies - not government employees but strangers just the same,‖ Posner added. --Many people write as though we make some great sacrifice by disclosing private information to others, but it is in fact simply the way that we obtain services we want - whether the market services of doctors, insurance companies, Internet service providers, employers, therapists and the rest or the nonmarket services of the 
government like welfare and security.‖ 
707. William Staples, (Prof. & Dir., Surveillance Studies Research Center, U. 
Kansas), EVERYDAY SURVEILLANCE: VIGILANCE AND VISIBILITY IN POSTMODERN LIFE, 2013, 203. We facilitate everyday surveillance as well when we consume products that either make us the potential targets of surveillance or, alternatively, give us the tools to watch others. Here, the daily act of consumption - so central to the organization of late capitalism - becomes directly tied to the distribution and spread of disciplinary technology. Seduced by the market's desires and our overwhelming dependence on it, we have become, to paraphrase Mark Poster, --individuals plugged into the circuits of our own panoptic control.‖ If the company hasn't already done so, we are quite willing to --wire‖ ourselves in as we rush to buy the latest products that offer us access to the --Net,‖ the --Web,‖ and --cell‖ phones (the irony of this new terminology should not be ignored). We post pictures of ourselves, families, and friends on the Web so anyone can see us. We also install the device to monitor our kids' texting, to keep an eye on their driving, or even to test them for drugs. We buy the videocams and use them to document our own movements, or we turn them on our friends, neighbors, or strangers and post them on YouTube for, the world to see. In a media saturated life where seemingly anyone can be a --star,‖ everybody gets their fifteen minutes of fame. 
708. Robert Litt, (General Counsel, Office of the Director of National Intelligence), 
IC ON THE RECORD, Mar. 17, 2014. Retrieved Feb. 8, 2015 from http://icontherecord.tumblr.com/post/79998577649/as-prepared-for-delivery-remarks- of- 
odni-general. In my view, telling the Intelligence Community that it cannot collect 
and analyze big data because of the risks of misuse is a bit like someone going to 
Kitty Hawk in December 1903, watching Orville and Wilbur Wright fly a flimsy 
wood and fabric contraption ten feet off the ground for a hundred feet, and deciding that this --aeroplane‖ is way too dangerous, and its potential benefits far too 
speculative. 
709. Julie Cohen, (Prof., Law, Georgetown U. Law Center), HARVARD LAW 
REVIEW, May 2013, 1904. The consequences of privacy's bad reputation are predictable: when privacy and its purportedly outdated values must be balanced against the cutting-edge imperatives of national security, efficiency, and entrepreneurship, privacy comes up the loser. The list of privacy's counterweights is long and growing. The recent additions of social media, mobile platforms, cloud computing, data mining, and predictive analytics now threaten to tip the scales 
entirely, placing privacy in permanent opposition to the progress of knowledge. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	68 
 
 
 
710. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. Some of the unhappiness created by the Snowden leaks reflects the fear that privacy, at least online, is irrevocably lost. This is probably right. Privacy has evolved in ways we did not expect when the Internet entered into widespread use. The Internet has changed in ways that make privacy extraneous. In 1998, Scott McNealy, then the CEO of Sun Microsystems, said, --You have zero privacy anyway, get over it.‖ At the time, his remark seemed intemperate, but however much privacy existed in 1998, only a fraction remains now. We live in a world of mass surveillance by both governments and private actors. All this has occurred under the gaze of a range of privacy groups who continue to espouse ideas about privacy that may no longer accurately reflect public attitudes and are likely outdated. 
711. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN 
Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 180. The GNPs key challenge is this: Given that there is basically no country on earth where government is not pressuring companies to do things that arguably infringe on citizens' rights, how do companies take practical steps to protect their customers' and users' rights to free expression and privacy? The potential answers are daunting in their complexity: Every country's legal and political system is different. Almost every Internet platform, equipment vendor, and telecommunications company is different in terms of its technologies and business models. Every company conducts business differently in every country in which it operates. 
712. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 107. Pure privacy - that is, the privacy of activities in your own home - remains reasonably well-protected. What has been lost, and will become even more so increasingly, is the anonymity of being able to act in public (whether physically or in cyberspace) without anyone having the technological capacity to permanently record and retain data about your activity for later analysis. 
713. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 126. The Internet also makes it possible to pierce the veil of anonymity through technical means. If data starts with an identification tag, that tag is, in the end, nearly impossible to remove. For example, according to two computer science researchers at the University of Texas, while Twitter and Flickr only have a 15 percent overlap in users, both networks can be de-anonymized with only a 12 percent error rate. Likewise, two MIT students built a program that analyzed Facebook friends and were able to predict the sexual orientation of people with a high degree of accuracy. And, according to Carnegie Mellon researchers, gender, birthdate, and zip code information are enough to uniquely identify 90 percent of the people in America. In short, if you really exist, your anonymous data isn't so anonymous. And if you don't - that's clear too. 
714. Kenneth Ryan, (Prof., Criminology, California State U. at Fresno), PRIVACY 
AND SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 14-15. We've spent a lot of time discussing federal government involvement in surveillance, but we have to remember that most modern surveillance comes from the private sector. Banks, insurance companies, and communications corporations, among others, collect massive amounts of information on Americans, which they use for a variety of purposes. For example, credit card companies use data mining to detect and stop fraud. And, as mentioned above, businesses use cookies to monitor Internet buying patterns to sell you products. More troubling for privacy advocates is that many businesses sell their data to improve their bottom line. Consumers are in the dark about who knows what about them. Regardless of the use, as John Markoff of the New York Times notes, --Millions of Americans have become enmeshed in a vast and growing data web that is constantly being examined by a legion of Internet-era 
software snoops.‖ 
715. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. On average, there are 16 tracking programs on every website. This means that when you visit a website, it collects and reports back to 16 companies on what you've looked at and what you 
have done. These programs are invisible to the user. They collect IP address, 
operating system and browser data, the name of the visiting computer, what you looked at, and how long you stayed. This data can be made even more valuable when it is matched with other data collections. Everything a consumer does online is tracked and collected. 
716. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. There is a thriving and largely 
invisible market in aggregating data on individuals and then selling it for commercial 
purposes. Data brokers collect utility bills, addresses, education, arrest records (arrests, not just convictions). All of this data is recorded, stored, and made available for sale. Social networking sites sell user data in some anonymized form so that every tweet or social media entry can be used to calculate market trends and refine advertising strategies. What can be predicted from this social media data is amazing - unemployment trends, disease outbreaks, consumption patterns for different groups, consumer preferences, and political trends. It is often more accurate than polling because it reflects peoples' actual behavior rather than the answer they think an 
interviewer wants to hear. Ironically, while the ability of U.S. agencies to use this 
commercial data is greatly restricted by law and policy, the same restrictions do not apply to foreign governments. 


717. James Lewis, (Dir., Strategic Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and International Studies), UNDERESTIMATING RISK IN THE SURVEILLANCE DEBATE, Dec. 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publica  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publica]tion/141209_Lewis_UnderestimatingRisk_Web.pdf. Some commentators hope that the United States can return to a simpler time when persons who wished to keep their information private did not have to disconnect entirely or live in a remote hut in 
Montana. Technological change has ended this era of de facto privacy and only a de 
jure approach can replace it. As more activities increasingly require some connection to the Internet (where they will be recorded and tracked) and as networked digital sensors become pervasive in our physical environment, simply amending the laws that govern the actions of U.S. agencies without affecting either private companies or foreign intelligence agencies will have little effect. 
718. John Gilliom, (Prof., Political Science, Ohio U.), SUPERVISION: AN 
INTRODUCTION TO THE SURVEILLANCE SOCIETY, 2013, 65. Surveillance is an important part of the demise of net neutrality. The top ISPs and search engines actively monitor which activities generate profits for them and which ones threaten those profits. Peer-to-peer file sharing on sites like BitTorrent may lend itself to piracy (illegally downloading copyrighted movies, songs, or games without paying required fees), and this may threaten profits, which could be why the giant cable and media company Comcast has intentionally slowed down or blocked access to this service in the past. Similarly, independent news media sites and blogs could be slowed down or censored because they challenge the dominant messages generated by mainstream media outlets, which happen to be owned by - or have close relationships with - service providers. In this vein, Google censors independent news from its Google News search engine, which requires careful monitoring and surveillance on its part. 
719. John Gilliom, (Prof., Political Science, Ohio U.), SUPERVISION: AN 
INTRODUCTION TO THE SURVEILLANCE SOCIETY, 2013, 65. Through surveillance, Internet users may be --socially sorted‖ and prioritized based on what they pay and what they do. But content providers from all points on the ideological spectrum may be slowed down and censored too. Another reason the neutrality of the Internet is so important to the politics of surveillance is that a great part of the surveillance society operates through the Internet. That's where the data are gathered, moved, and managed. As long as the Net stays free, the possibilities for access and challenge remain stronger. But it appears that the democratic potential of the Internet may be on the chopping block. 
720. Sarah Lange, (Dir., Arzuw Foundation, a non-profit organization dedicated to 
supporting the next generation of leaders in Turkmenistan), THE FLETCHER FORUM OF WORLD AFFAIRS, Winter 2014, 50. As Western produced mass surveillance tools further empower repressive regimes around the world, citizens of the democratic West must now also decide what role mass surveillance has in a democracy. The balance of power within a democracy is not static, but rather constantly shifts between citizen and state. It is this continuous movement of the balance of power that ensures the health and perpetuation of democracy. The preeminent difference between mass surveillance programs in democracies like the United States and those employed by authoritarian regimes is the existence of constitutional controls and judicial oversight that can be exercised to review such programs and reign in the extent of their reach. In authoritarian regimes no such control mechanism exists leaving the state with an unfettered ability to completely and absolutely monitor its citizens with terrifying accuracy and ease. 
721. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 117. What we really must mean by anonymity is not a pure form of privacy akin to secrecy. Rather, what we mean is that even though one's conduct is examined, routinely and regularly, both with and without one's knowledge, nothing adverse should happen to you without good cause. In other words, the veil of anonymity - previously protected by our practical obscurity - that is now so readily pierced by technology must be protected by rules that limit when the piercing may happen as a means of protecting privacy and preventing governmental abuse. To put it more precisely, the key to this conception of privacy is that privacy's principal virtue is as a limitation on consequence. If there are no unjustified consequences - that is, consequences that are the product of abuse, or error, or the application of an unwise policy - then, under this vision, there is no effect on a cognizable liberty/privacy interest. 
722. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN 
Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 193. Writer and critic Evgeny Morozov has been even more critical of the US government's --Internet freedom‖ policy, warning that any policy based on the assumption that the Internet inherently helps democracy and hurts authoritarianism is misguided, counterproductive, and downright dangerous. His book The Net Delusion offers a scathing condemnation of the --cyber-utopian‖ and --Internet-centric‖ worldviews he believes to be epidemic among American academics (including Shirky and Zuckerman), alongside many activists, foundations, journalists, politicians, and investors. He mocks what he calls the --Google Doctrine - the enthusiastic belief in the liberating power of technology accompanied by the irresistible urge to enlist Silicon Valley start-ups in the global fight for freedom.‖ Cyber-utopianism, he argues, is dangerous because it fails to recognize that the Internet --penetrates and reshapes all walks of political life, not just the ones conducive to democratization.‖ The Internet, he points out, empowers dictators, demagogues, and terrorists as much as it empowers democrats. How the Internet interacts with politics and the particulars of how it is used for good and for ill vary drastically from country to country. 
723. Stewart Baker, (Attorney, Steptoe & Johnson, LLP), THE 
ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF FISA AUTHORITIES, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 75. We can pass laws turning the federal government into an Amish village, but big data is here to stay, and it will be used by everyone else. Every year, data gets cheaper to collect and cheaper to analyze. You can be sure that corporate America is taking advantage of this remorseless trend. The same is true of the cyberspies in China's Peoples' Liberation Army. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	69 
 
 
 
724. Siva Vaidhyanathan, (Pres., Media Studies, U. Virginia), THE GOOGLIZATION OF EVERYTHING, 2012, 112-113. ChoicePoint, Facebook, Google, and Amazon want us to relax and be ourselves. They have an interest in exploiting niche markets that our consumer choices have generated. These companies are devoted to tracking our eccentricities because they understand that the ways we set ourselves apart from the mass are the things about which we are most passionate. Our passions, predilections, fancies, and fetishes are what we are likely to spend our surplus cash on and thus make us easy targets for precise marketing. 
725. Siva Vaidhyanathan, (Pres., Media Studies, U. Virginia), THE 
GOOGLIZATION OF EVERYTHING, 2012, 113. In the twenty-first-century liberal state, domination does not demand social or cultural conformity. The state, like every private firm that employs a sophisticated method of marketing, wants us to express ourselves - to choose - because mere expression of difference is usually both harmless and remarkably useful to the powerful. 
726. Bob Liodice, (Pres., Association of National Advertisers), THE NEED FOR 
PRIVACY PROTECTIONS: IS INDUSTRY SELF-REGULATION ADEQUATE?, Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Comm. Hearing, June 28, 2012, 6. Because of this advertising support, consumers can access a wealth of online resources at low or no cost. Revenues from online advertising facilitate e-commerce and subsidize the cost of content and services that consumers value, such as online newspapers, blogs, social networking sites, mobile applications, e-mail, and phone services. These advertising-supported resources have transformed our daily lives. 
727. Michael Zaneis, (General Counsel, Interactive Advertising Bureau), 
BALANCING PRIVACY AND INNOVATION: DOES THE PRESIDENT'S PROPOSAL TIP THE SCALE?, House Energy and Commerce Comm. Hearing, Mar. 29, 2012, 150. Advertising fuels the Internet economic engine. Revenues from online advertising support and facilitate e-commerce and subsidize the cost of content and services that consumers value, such as online newspapers, Hogs, social networking sites, mobile applications, email, and phone services. Because of advertising support, consumers can access a wealth of online resources at low or no cost. These advertising-supported resources have transformed our daily lives. The support provided by online advertising is substantial and growing despite the difficult economic times. In the first half of 2011, Internet advertising revenues reached a new high of $14.9 billion, an impressive 23% higher than the same period the previous year. 
728. Michael Zaneis, (General Counsel, Interactive Advertising Bureau), 
BALANCING PRIVACY AND INNOVATION: DOES THE PRESIDENT'S PROPOSAL TIP THE SCALE?, House Energy and Commerce Comm. Hearing, Mar. 29, 2012, 151. Interest-based advertising is an essential form of online advertising. As the Subcommittee knows, interest-based advertising, also called behavioral advertising, is delivered based on consumer preferences or interests as inferred from data about online activities. Consumers are likely to find interest-based advertisements more relevant than random messages, and advertisers are more likely to attract consumers that want their products and services. Websites also benefit because interest-based advertising garners better responses, allowing websites to earn more revenue - and support more content and services - with fewer advertisements. 
729. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 27-28. Virtually every terrorist group has a website and is utilizing the Internet for recruitment, spreading its message, communications, and a variety of other purposes. In terms of weapons, insurgents in Iraq have used sophisticated improvised explosive devices (IEDs) in their attacks. The insurgents have proved to be technologically adaptable, as they switched from first using remote-controlled IEDs to then using long wires buried in the ground (also known as --command wires‖) in order to detonate the bombs after US troops acquired the ability to successfully jam the remote-controlled devices. 
730. Eric Schmidt, (Former Chief Technology Officer, Oracle America), THE NEW 
DIGITAL AGE: RESHAPING THE FUTURE OF PEOPLE, NATIONS AND BUSINESS, 2013, 156. Looking ahead, future terror groups will develop their own sophisticated and secure social platforms, which could ultimately serve as digital training camps as well. These sites will expand their reach to potential new recruits, enable information-sharing among disparate cells and serve as an online community for like-minded individuals. These virtual safe houses will be invaluable to extremists, provided that there are no double agents and that the digital encryption is strong enough. 
731. Eric Schmidt, (Former Chief Technology Officer, Oracle America), THE NEW 
DIGITAL AGE: RESHAPING THE FUTURE OF PEOPLE, NATIONS AND BUSINESS, 2013, 165. Terrorist groups and governments alike will try to recruit engineers and hackers to fight for their side. Recognizing how a cadre of technically skilled strategists enhances their destructive capacity, they will increasingly target engineers, students, programmers and computer scientists at universities and companies, building out the next generation of cyber jihadists. 
732. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 29. For the individual interested in perpetrating a terrorist attack, everything from how to build homemade bombs to maps and diagrams of potential targets were available on the Internet. So, too, were detailed accounts of terrorist incidents around the world, which lone wolves could study in order to determine what might work for them. In addition, the Internet provided a mechanism for lone wolves to become infatuated with extremist ideologies through the reading of websites, blogs, Facebook pages, and other tools available online. Lone wolves could also find other like-minded individuals on the Internet and obtain help from one or two other people in perpetrating an attack. 
733. Seth Jones, (Dir., International Security and Defense Policy Center, RAND 
Corporation), HUNTING IN THE SHADOWS: THE PURSUIT OF AL QA'IDA SINCE 9/11, 2012, 442. The rise of the Internet and social media fundamentally changed terrorist activities. Individuals such as Anwar al-Awlaki, Adam Gadahn, and Shaykh Abdallah Ibrahim al-Faisal utilized YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, Internet chat rooms, and other forums to distribute propaganda, recruit new supporters, and seek financial aid. 


734. Marc Goodman, (Former Agent with FBI and Interpol; now Prof., Law, Singularity University), FUTURE CRIMES, 2015, 78. What data of yours the government doesn't subpoena, it just buys. The NSA and other government agencies didn't build their global eavesdropping and data-siphoning network from scratch; they purchased or otherwise obtained a complete copy of what the corporate world was already collecting. It makes perfect sense: Why build what they can just buy? ChoicePoint, now owned by Reed Elsevier, maintains seventeen billion records on businesses and individuals that it resells to its 100,000 clients, including to 7,000 federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies. 
735. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN 
Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 96. A growing body of academic research shows that Internet filtering has done little to stop the actual exploitation of real children and may even be exacerbating the problem. In late 2009 a team of academic researchers from France, Germany, the Netherlands, and Ireland published a research paper titled --Internet Blocking: Balancing Cybercrime Responses in Democratic Societies.‖ After examining the impact of censorship on child pornographers, they reached a disturbing conclusion: though Internet filtering makes criminals' web-sites invisible to the general public, people who are determined to access them can easily figure out how to do so. Furthermore, the censorship does nothing to stop or bring to justice the people who are exploiting children in the first place. Nor does this kind of censorship actually stop criminals from trafficking in children and distributing child porn via e-mail or file-sharing services. 
736. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN 
Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 96-97. In some countries, concerned citizens have successfully reversed or stopped the implementation of national censorship schemes. In Australia a proposed national censorship system officially aimed at child porn and terrorism met with strong opposition. In March 2009, when the idea was first being debated, WikiLeaks published a secret government list of 2,935 websites that Internet service providers would be required to block as part of a test run. It turned out that the content went beyond child porn and terrorism to include online poker and euthanasia. For reasons nobody could explain, a few businesses with no ties to child porn or other crimes also turned up on the list - including the offices of a dentist in Queensland. The point was that even in democracies, secret censorship lists end up censoring things that go beyond the original mandate - whether by mistake or on purpose. Once websites get on the list, it is difficult for them to be removed, because the list itself is secret. 
737. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN 
Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 97. In 2009 the German Parliament passed an Internet censorship law aimed at protecting children. Free speech groups pointed out that the list of websites to be blocked from public view was maintained by the police without any mechanism for public oversight. Immediately after the law was passed, a number of German politicians suggested that the list be extended to Islamist websites, video game sites, and gambling sites, and book publishers have suggested it would also be nice to block file-sharing sites while they are at it. Once the censorship mechanism was set up, the question became: Could Germany's political and legal systems prevent this mechanism from being abused? Civil liberties groups argued that abuse was inevitable. They eventually won over enough members of Parliament, and the law was overturned in early 2011. 
738. Jennifer Martinez, (Staff), THE HILL, June 20, 2013, 9. David Drummond, 
Google's chief legal officer, on Wednesday pushed back against allegations that the search company is "in cahoots with the NSA" and has allowed the spy agency to tap into its servers for user data. "I'm not sure I can say this more clearly: We're not in cahoots with the NSA and there's is no government program that Google participates in that allows the kind of access that the media originally reported," Drummond said in response to a question asked during a live online chat hosted by U.K. newspaper The Guardian. "There is no free-for-all, no direct access, no indirect access, no back door, no drop box," he added. 
739. Jennifer Martinez, (Staff), THE HILL, June 20, 2013, 9. Media reports initially 
said that the NSA had been given direct access to the servers of nine U.S. Internet companies, including Google, Facebook, Microsoft and Yahoo. Tech companies have fiercely denied those reports and participation in any surveillance program that gives the government direct access to its servers. Drummond noted during the Internet chat that "many of those original sources corrected their articles after it became clear that 
the PRISM slides were not accurate." 
740. Craig Timberg, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, My 2, 2014, A1. Major U.S. 
technology companies have largely ended the practice of quietly complying with investigators' demands for e-mail records and other online data, saying that users have a right to know in advance when their information is targeted for government seizure. 
741. Craig Timberg, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, My 2, 2014, A1. Fueling the 
shift is the industry's eagerness to distance itself from the government after last year's disclosures about National Security Agency surveillance of online services. Apple, Microsoft, Facebook and Google all are updating their policies to expand routine notification of users about government data seizures, unless specifically gagged by a judge or another legal authority, officials at all four companies said. Yahoo announced similar changes in July. 
742. Craig Timberg, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, My 2, 2014, A1. As this 
position becomes uniform across the industry, U.S. tech companies will ignore the instructions stamped on the fronts of subpoenas urging them not to alert subjects about data requests, industry lawyers say. Companies that already routinely notify users have found that investigators often drop data demands to avoid having suspects learn of inquiries. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	70 
 
 
 
743. Craig Timberg, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, My 2, 2014, A1. The changing legal standards of technology companies most directly affect federal, state and local criminal investigators, who have found that companies increasingly balk at data requests once considered routine. Most now refuse to disclose the contents of e-mails or social-media posts when presented with subpoenas, insisting that the government instead seek search warrants, which are issued only by judges and require the stricter legal standard of probable cause. Subpoenas, by contrast, can be issued by a broader range of authorities and require only that the information sought be deemed "relevant" to an investigation. A 2010 ruling by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 6th Circuit backed the industry's contention that search warrants should be required for digital content, a standard now widely accepted. 
744. David Sanger, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, June 7, 2014, A1. A year after Mr. 
Snowden's revelations, the era of quiet cooperation is over. Telecommunications companies say they are denying requests to volunteer data not covered by existing law. A.T.&T., Verizon and others say that compared with a year ago, they are far more reluctant to cooperate with the United States government in ''gray areas'' where there is no explicit requirement for a legal warrant. 
745. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN 
Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 179-180. Recognition of this reality - largely forced by congressional threat of legislation in 2006 - is what brought Yahoo, Google, and Microsoft to the bargaining table with human rights groups, socially responsible investors, and academics to set up a multi-stakeholder process focused on free expression and privacy. Following nearly three years of dialogue and negotiation, in late 2008 they launched the Global Network Initiative (GNI), dedicated to helping Internet and telecommunications companies uphold their users' and customers' rights to freedom of expression and privacy around the world in ways that are credible and accountable. 
746. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN 
Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 186. The GNI is the only coherent effort so far by which any Internet-related companies have agreed to be held publicly accountable in any meaningful way for the impact of their businesses on human rights around the world. Companies in the GNI must be held to account for their commitments - and so too must the far greater number of companies that share similar risks and responsibilities explain just how they are addressing them, if not through the GNI. 
747. Bob Liodice, (Pres., Association of National Advertisers), THE NEED FOR 
PRIVACY PROTECTIONS: IS INDUSTRY SELF-REGULATION ADEQUATE?, Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Comm. Hearing, June 28, 2012, 48. Creativity and innovation is the basis for the Internet. And we recognize that, as part of our self-regulatory principles, we have to allow enough room and flexibility to adopt to a changing economy and rapidly changing technologies. If we lock ourselves in place too rigidly, we may choke off the kind of innovation and creativity which is the basis for our dynamic U.S. economy, which, in the end, may cost jobs here in the United States and around the world, if, in fact, we don't have that flexible and open society. 
748. Bob Liodice, (Pres., Association of National Advertisers), THE NEED FOR 
PRIVACY PROTECTIONS: IS INDUSTRY SELF-REGULATION ADEQUATE?, Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Comm. Hearing, June 28, 2012, 9. For the past 40 years, the advertising industry has distinguished itself through its self- regulatory system for independent oversight of compliance and public reporting of enforcement actions. In keeping with this tradition, a key feature of the DAA Self- Regulatory Program is accountability. All of our Self-Regulatory Principles are backed by the robust enforcement programs administered by the Council of Better Business Bureaus (--CBBB‖) and the DMA. 
749. Chris Babel, (CEO, TRUSTe), NEW TECHNOLOGIES AND INNOVATIONS 
IN THE MOBILE AND ONLINE SPACE, AND THE IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, June 19, 2012, 55. A self- regulatory model, if articulated correctly, is best equipped to deal with complex industries and technologies in a way that preserves incentives for all players involved. Increasingly, as the TRUSTe brand and privacy-related service offerings help businesses address today's privacy challenges and build online trust with consumers, we see a robust future market for privacy solutions that are based on self-regulatory frameworks. This is evidenced by TRUSTe's own growth - participation in our certification pro-grams grew by over 80% in 2011. In a market economy, self- regulation is driven by a company's desire to advance trust in their brand through exemplary privacy practices. 
750. James Grimmelmann, (Prof., Law, NYU Law School), NEW TECHNOLOGIES 
AND INNOVATIONS IN THE MOBILE AND ONLINE SPACE, AND THE IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, June 19, 2012, 66. The proliferation of social networks demonstrates vividly the intense consumer desire for sharing mechanisms that fit their personal preferences. Technology companies need to be free to develop new controlled-access sharing models, and to explain their benefits to users. 
751. Robert Litt, (General Counsel, Office of the Director of National Intelligence), 
IC ON THE RECORD, Mar. 17, 2014. Retrieved Feb. 8, 2015 from http://icontherecord.tumblr.com/post/79998577649/as-prepared-for-delivery-remarks- of- odni-general. At the end of the day we need to determine whether there is a system of controls and oversight that gives us comfort that our intelligence services are using big data appropriately. I believe that there could be such a system. We could impose 
strict limits on the purpose for which big data may be used, the types of analysis that 
can be done against it, and how it could be disseminated to others. Approval and review processes could be designed to ensure that big data was used only in conformity with the limits we establish. We could use technological tools to restrict and monitor access to the data to enforce those restrictions. We could place limits on how long data can be stored in our databases. And we could use our existing compliance and oversight framework to proactively discover mistakes and quickly fix them. If this approach sounds familiar, it's because this is what the Intelligence Community already does. 


752. Peter Swire, (Prof., Law, Ohio State U. College of Law), STATE OF FEDERAL PRIVACY AND DATA SECURITY LAW: LAGGING BEHIND THE TIMES?, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2012, 75. The Privacy Act was passed at the end of 1974, the year that President Nixon resigned from office. Along with the Freedom of Information Act, it was enacted to address a pattern of secret government surveillance of American citizens. The history of this surveillance has been told before, but it is useful to periodically remind ourselves about actions such as the years of wiretapping of Martin Luther King, Jr., the domestic intelligence files created by the FBI on hundreds of thousands of Americans, and the use of IRS tax records against the President's political --enemies Iist. --‗ We should learn from this history so we do not repeat it. 
753. Greg Wilshusen, (Dir., Information Security Issues, U.S. Government 
Accountability Office), STATE OF FEDERAL PRIVACY AND DATA SECURITY LAW: LAGGING BEHIND THE TIMES?, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2012, 55. Federal agency collection or use of personal information is governed primarily by two laws: the Privacy Act of 1974 and the privacy provisions of the E-Government Act of 2002. The Privacy Act places limitations on agencies' collection, disclosure, and use of personal information maintained in systems of records. The act describes a record as any item, collection, or grouping of information about an individual that is maintained by an agency and contains his or her name or another personal identifier. The act defines a --system of records‖ as a group of records under the control of any agency from which information is retrieved by the name of the individual or by an individual identifier. The Privacy Act requires that when agencies establish or make changes to a system of records, they must notify the public through a system-of-records notice in the Federal Register that identifies, among other things, the categories of data collected, the categories of individuals about whom information is collected, the intended --routine‖ uses of data, and procedures that individuals can use to review and correct personally identifiable information. 
754. Greg Wilshusen, (Dir., Information Security Issues, U.S. Government 
Accountability Office), STATE OF FEDERAL PRIVACY AND DATA SECURITY LAW: LAGGING BEHIND THE TIMES?, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2012, 55-56. The E-Government Act of 2002 was passed, among other reasons, to enhance the protection for personal information in government information systems or information collections by requiring that agencies conduct privacy impact assessments (PIA). PIAs are analyses of how personal information is collected, stored, shared, and managed in a federal system. 
755. Daniel Murfet, (Prof., Mathematics, U. Southern California), BIG DATA 
POWER: WHAT TO EXPECT FROM MASS SURVEILLANCE, Jan. 2014, 6. One of the most important ways to act is open to each of us individually. Part of the good news is that a lot of the technology to hold the dangers of mass surveillance at bay is already available. Thanks to the hard work of a dedicated community of computer experts, strong encryption and anonymization for emails, chats, telephony and many other applications is possible for everyone. It is very simple: if nearly everybody encrypts their communications and anonymizes their private online activities, Big Data Power abuse is already stopped at the initial step of collecting usable data. Intelligence agencies could go back to focusing on actual suspects and targets. 
756. Winston Maxwell, (Attorney, Hogan Lovells, LLC.), A GLOBAL REALITY: 
GOVERNMENT ACCESS TO DATA IN THE CLOUDS, May 23, 2012, 5. In sum, governmental authorities in the United States cannot access data stored in the Cloud at will. Rather, governmental authority is circumscribed by the United States Constitution and state constitutions, judicial oversight, and laws and procedures enacted through the democratic process. In addition, and relevant to the concerns of foreign countries about their nationals' data, a recent ruling by a United States appeals court one level below the Supreme Court confirmed that statutory protections are extended to non-United States citizens for data physically maintained in the United States and stored in the Cloud. 
757. David Greene, (Sr. Staff Attorney, Electronic Frontier Foundation), NSA MASS 
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS: UNNECESSARY AND DISPROPORTIONATE, 
Apr. 29, 2014. Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from https://www.eff.org/files/2014/05/29/ 
unnecessary_and_disproportionate.pdf. MUSCULAR: This operation, which began in 2009, infiltrates links between global data centers of technology companies, such 
as Google and Yahoo!, not on US soil. These two companies responded to the revelation of MUSCULAR by encrypting those exchanges. 
758. Jon Leibowitz, (Chair, U.S. Federal Trade Commission), BALANCING 
PRIVACY AND INNOVATION: DOES THE PRESIDENT'S PROPOSAL TIP THE SCALE?, House Energy and Commerce Comm. Hearing, Mar. 29, 2012, 47. In another important effort, the online advertising industry, led by the DAA [Digital Advertising Alliance], has implemented a behavioral advertising opt-out program. The DAA's accomplishments are notable: it has developed a notice and choice mechanism through a standard icon in ads and on publisher sites; deployed the icon broadly, with reportedly over 900 billion impressions served each month; obtained commitments to follow the self-regulatory principles from advertisers, ad networks, and publishers that represent close to 90 percent of the online behavioral advertising market; and established an enforcement mechanism designed to ensure compliance with the principles. 
759. Jon Leibowitz, (Chair, U.S. Federal Trade Commission), BALANCING 
PRIVACY AND INNOVATION: DOES THE PRESIDENT'S PROPOSAL TIP THE SCALE?, House Energy and Commerce Comm. Hearing, Mar. 29, 2012, 48. At the same time, the World Wide Web Consortium (--W3C‖), an Internet standards- setting body, has gathered a broad range of stakeholders to create an international, industry-wide standard for Do Not Track, including DAA member companies; other U.S. and international companies; industry groups; and public interest organizations. The W3C group has done admirable work to flesh out how to make a Do Not Track system practical in both desktop and mobile settings as reflected in two public working drafts of its standards.' Some important issues remain, and the Commission encourages all of the stakeholders to work within the W3C group to resolve these issues. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	71 
 
 
 
760. Bob Liodice, (Pres., Association of National Advertisers), THE NEED FOR PRIVACY PROTECTIONS: IS INDUSTRY SELF-REGULATION ADEQUATE?, Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Comm. Hearing, June 28, 2012, 5. My testimony today will describe how the online advertising industry has successfully worked to give consumers transparency about online data collection practices and to create easy, uniform, and effective tools for consumers to control online data collection. DAA participating companies recognize that consumers may have different preferences about online advertising and data collection in general, and want to build consumer trust in the online experience by ensuring that consumers have meaningful choices about how data is collected and used. 
761. Theresa Payton, (Former Chief Information Officer at the White House, 2006- 
2008), PRIVACY IN THE AGE OF BIG DATA, 2014, 78. The Digital Advertising Alliance's opt-out site provides consumers a way to opt out of behavioral tracking for participating advertisers. 
762. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN 
Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 187-188. With Clinton's speech, --Internet freedom‖ became a prominent component of US diplomacy, alongside human rights and democracy-promotion policies. The problem, however, is that the phrase --Internet freedom‖ is like a Rorschach inkblot test: different people look at the same ink splotch and see very different things. 
763. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN 
Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 188. Global Internet freedom policy in Washington began with an emphasis on the first category: freedom through the Internet, a notion sometimes also referred to as --liberation technology.‖ Under the previous administration of President George W. Bush, the State Department had already begun a program to support technologies for circumventing censorship. Between 2007 and 2010 Congress --earmarked‖ a total of $50 million to support technologies that would --tear down the firewalls‖ in countries where Internet censorship is heaviest, particularly China and Iran. Clinton made it clear that the State Department's initiative to support global Internet freedom would be broadened. 
764. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Mason U.), STATE OF FEDERAL 
PRIVACY AND DATA SECURITY LAW: LAGGING BEHIND THE TIMES?, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2012, 112. Our privacy laws and our conceptions of privacy cannot withstand the technological change that is happening and the cyber conflict that is developing. We must put theories of data availability and anonymity on a sounder footing - a footing that will withstand the rigors of ever-increasing computational capacity. To do so we need to define what values underlie our instinctive privacy-protective reaction to the new technology, assess how realistic threats of abuse and misuse are, and create legal and policy incentives to foster positive applications while restraining adverse ones. 
765. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN 
Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 90. A national poll in 2006 revealed that 85 percent of South Korean high school students were under stress from cyber-bullying. Not surprisingly, many South Koreans felt that things had gotten out of control, and voters have clamored for their elected representatives to do something. The result was a law stipulating that all websites with more than 100,000 visitors per day must require users, when creating accounts, to supply not only their real names and addresses but also their national ID card numbers - which happen to be connected to a very efficient national database. Anonymity, South Korean legislators had come to believe, was undermining social stability, enabling cyber-mobs to harass innocent people and cyber-vigilantes to ostracize and shame people for less-than- admirable but nonetheless not criminal behavior. But this legal solution pursued by a democratically elected parliament ended up being used by economically and politically powerful people in South Korea to stifle speech they happened to find threatening. 
766. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 21. The first vulnerability is the problem of anonymity. Given the vastness of the web, it is quite possible for those who seek to do harm to do so at a distance, cloaked in the veil of anonymity behind a false or ever changing cyber persona. While anonymity can be overcome, doing so requires a very great investment of time and resources. It also often requires the good guys to use bad guy techniques to track the malefactors. In effect, this makes many malfeasant actors immune, for all practical purposes, from swift and sure response or retaliation. 
767. Joanna Kulesza, (Prof., Law, U. of Lodz, Poland), UNIVERSITY OF 
ARKANSAS AT LITTLE ROCK LAW REVIEW, Summer 2012, 756. There is no uniform federal privacy regulation in the U.S. because the government considers it an obstacle to developing free trade and e-commerce. Introducing federal privacy regulations would also be too complex considering the U.S. constitutional regime and the delegation of authority to the states. A unique model regulation developed with the help of the United States Department of Commerce guarantees the protection of few individual rights. The document is aimed at aiding the market self-regulation by establishing a uniform standard for the protection of personal data. It is, therefore, quite different from the European model, which requires governments to take an active role in protecting state residents' privacy. 
768. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN 
Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 93. The previous year, Google ran afoul of Italian law as well as public sentiment favoring stronger control of online speech to protect innocent children and the disabled from harassment. In early 2010 an Italian judge handed down criminal sentences to four top Google executives (including David Drummond, the senior vice president who around the same time was busy handling the aftermath of Google's --new approach‖ to China) because YouTube staff had not been quick enough to remove all copies of a video of an autistic child being bullied by his classmates. 


769. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 92. The Indian government's approach to controlling hate speech and suspected terrorist activity online has also raised concerns about whether the costs could ultimately outweigh the benefits. A new law that went into effect in late 2009 holds domestic and international Internet companies - including Yahoo, Facebook, YouTube, and Twitter - accountable for helping to maintain --public order, decency, or morality.‖ Companies are expected to take the initiative to remove potentially inflammatory material. Failure to comply can result in jail terms of up to seven years for executives. 
770. Winston Maxwell, (Attorney, Hogan Lovells, LLC.), A GLOBAL REALITY: 
GOVERNMENT ACCESS TO DATA IN THE CLOUDS, May 23, 2012, 2. On the fundamental question of governmental access to data in the Cloud, we conclude, based on the research underlying this White Paper, that it is not possible to isolate data in the Cloud from governmental access based on the physical location of the Cloud service provider or its facilities. Government's ability to access data in the Cloud extends across borders. And it is incorrect to assume that the United States government's access to data in the Cloud is greater than that of other advanced economies. 
771. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN 
Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 173-174. To address corporate complicity with authoritarian censorship and surveillance, for the past decade some members of Congress and many human rights groups have supported a bill called the Global Online Freedom Act (GOFA). One of GOFA's many problems, however, is that when it was originally written in 2004, it sought to address the problems faced by and created by companies operating in China at the time - which in Internet time is ancient history. The problems have long since evolved, spread much more globally, and grown much more complex. 
772. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN 
Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 174. Blocking US Internet and telecommunications companies from ever operating in authoritarian or quasi- democratic countries amounts to counterproductive overkill, preventing citizens from using some of the world's most innovative and open technology to advocate for change, let alone shutting companies out of massive markets that are no longer --emerging‖ but are now well established. 
773. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN 
Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 174. A broader and more intractable problem with regulating technology companies is that legislation appears much too late in corporate innovation and business cycles. Legislation does nothing to help companies anticipate problems that their business or design choices might create - before they implement them. By the time a law is called for, the damage has already been done and alternative paths have long been closed off. 
774. Rebecca MacKinnon, (Co-founder of Global Voices Online & Former CNN 
Bureau Chief in Tokyo), CONSENT OF THE NETWORKED: THE WORLD-WIDE STRUGGLE FOR INTERNET FREEDOM, 2012, 175. Because government is often part of the problem even in democracies, corporate collusion in government surveillance and censorship is unlikely to be solved by the passage and enforcement of laws, even by the most well-intentioned and democratic of governments. Companies must also be convinced that respecting and protecting their users' universally recognized human rights is in their long-term commercial self-interest - a proposition that continues to puzzle or elude too many Internet companies, in contrast to longer established technology companies and others in virtually every other industry. 
775. Michael Zaneis, (General Counsel, Interactive Advertising Bureau), 
BALANCING PRIVACY AND INNOVATION: DOES THE PRESIDENT'S PROPOSAL TIP THE SCALE?, House Energy and Commerce Comm. Hearing, Mar. 29, 2012, 156. In particular, both the Administration and the Federal Trade Commission have called for comprehensive legislation in the area of consumer data privacy. The IAB does not believe that such new legislation is needed at this time. There has been no demonstration that legislation is needed or any evaluation of legislation's likely impact on this leading area of American job creation. lAB is concerned that laws and regulations are inflexible and can quickly become outdated in the face of evolving technologies. When this occurs, legislation thwarts innovation and hinders economic growth. 
776. Newton Lee, (Former Staff Member, Institute for Defense Analysis), 
FACEBOOK NATION: TOTAL INFORMATION AWARENESS, 2013, 79. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is also a beneficiary of the Big Data Research and Development Initiative. CDC's BioSense program --tracks health problems as they evolve and provides public health officials with the data, information and tools they need to better prepare for and coordinate responses to safeguard and improve the health of the American people‖. 
777. Newton Lee, (Former Staff Member, Institute for Defense Analysis), 
FACEBOOK NATION: TOTAL INFORMATION AWARENESS, 2013, 117-118. Indeed, the White House has been promoting the Open Data Initiatives program to --stimulate a rising tide of innovation and entrepreneurship that utilizes government data to create tools that help Americans in numerous ways - e.g., apps and services that help people find the right health care provider, identify the college that provides the best value for their money, save money on electricity bills through smarter shopping, or keep their families safe by knowing which products have been recalled‖. The Open Data Initiatives program will also support the Health Data Initiative launched in 2010 by the Institute of Medicine and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	72 
 
 
 
778. Michael Zaneis, (General Counsel, Interactive Advertising Bureau), BALANCING PRIVACY AND INNOVATION: DOES THE PRESIDENT'S PROPOSAL TIP THE SCALE?, House Energy and Commerce Comm. Hearing, Mar. 29, 2012, 156-157. Formal rules can also serve as a disincentive to the marketplace to innovate in the area of privacy. Companies are increasingly offering consumers new privacy features and tools such as sophisticated preference managers, persistent opt outs, universal choice mechanisms, and shortened data retention policies. These developments demonstrate that companies are responsive to consumers and that companies are focusing on privacy as a means to distinguish themselves in the marketplace. IAB believes that this impressive competition and innovation should be encouraged. New laws or rules could impede future developments or discourage companies from continuing to compete over privacy features. 
779. Emily Shoor, (Articles Editor), BROOKLYN JOURNAL OF 
INTERNATIONAL LAW, 2014, 492-493. Although the Right to be Forgotten is a new concept in relation to the Internet, it is derived from existing notions of privacy. European countries have strong traditions of protecting individual privacy and limiting personal content published in public forums. The origin of this notion is derived from the French concept le Doit a l'Oubli, which loosely translates to --the right to oblivion.‖ If enacted, Article 17 of the Regulation would codify a modern version of this concept into EU law. The French notion of privacy allows people to escape their past and control what is said about them. Similar notions of privacy can be found in other countries across Europe. The approach to privacy by these European countries, particularly France and Germany, is --diametrically opposed‖ to the United States' approach. Where the United States values the First Amendment protections of freedom of expression far more than individual privacy, European countries place a greater premium on individual privacy. 
780. Richard Peltz-Steele, (Prof., Law, U. Massachusetts School of Law), 
GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW, Winter 2013, 368. Throw into the mix the American affection for laissez faire economic regulation, and the conflict between privacy in Europe and free speech in the United States starts to come into focus. Even supposing that U.S. lawmakers were inclined to regulate the commercial information marketplace, rules that preclude the dissemination of lawfully obtained, truthful information run headlong into the free speech imperative and the rule against prior restraints. The controverted commercial speech doctrine offers some room for an information-regulatory regime in the United States, subject to an intermediate constitutional scrutiny. But the EU system is not confined to the commercial context. 
781. Robert Walker, (JD Candidate, U. California College of Law), HASTINGS 
LAW JOURNAL, Dec. 2012, 270. When Americans and Europeans speak of privacy, they are often talking about very different things. At the most basic level, the differences come down to conceiving of privacy as an aspect of personal liberty or as a component of personal dignity. In the United States, where privacy is normally couched in the language of liberty, public policy is primarily concerned with protecting a citizen's --reasonable expectations of privacy‖ against impermissible government intrusion. For example, American distrust of centralized power is embodied in the Fourth Amendment, which situates the home as the primary bulwark of privacy, and the government as its primary enemy. In contrast, European privacy laws are primarily intended to safeguard an individual's dignity and public image, rather than to protect against governmental intrusions. 
782. Alessandra Suuberg, (Sr. Managing Editor), TULANE JOURNAL OF 
TECHNOLOGY & INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, Fall 2013, 276. As previously suggested, American privacy law generally considers the home the primary defense and the state the primary threat. American anxieties focus on the sanctity of the home, and the prime danger since the eighteenth century has been that the government will intrude there. Meanwhile, the fixation on intrusions by private actors such as the media is relatively lesser in the United States than it is in Europe. 
783. Emily Shoor, (Articles Editor), BROOKLYN JOURNAL OF 
INTERNATIONAL LAW, 2014, 498. Where countries in Europe protect privacy as a fundamental right, the United States protects freedom of expression over privacy. For example, in the Bill of Rights, the First Amendment explicitly protects the freedom of expression; however no explicit protection exists for privacy. In addition, the United States --fiercely‖ defends the right to free press, but grants no specific right to privacy. 
784. Emily Shoor, (Articles Editor), BROOKLYN JOURNAL OF 
INTERNATIONAL LAW, 2014, 500. The differences can also be explained by looking to socio-political differences between Europe and the United States; U.S. law developed critical of centralized power, while European law originates from social traditions of aristocracy, honor, and autonomy. The difference in valuing privacy over freedom of expression is why the Right to Be Forgotten fits within the framework of the EU, but conflicts with the values underlying U.S. law. These policy implications inform the analysis of the Regulation, and show where the Regulation is unclear and needs to be modified before it becomes effective. 


785. Jesse Kline, (Staff), NATIONAL POST, July 2, 2014, A10. A few months ago, hardly anyone had heard of Spanish lawyer Mario Costeja Gonzalez. Now, a Google search for his name yields tens of thousands of hits - most of which will inform you that his house was foreclosed on in 1998 to pay off some of his debts. Many years ago, when this fact became public knowledge on the Internet, Gonzalez had trouble rebuilding his financial life: The web had made him a credit-risk pariah. So he went to the Court of Justice of the European Union and sued Google to try to have the information about his foreclosure removed from the search engine's results. A few weeks ago, he won the case in a decision that establishes a --right to be forgotten.‖ Gonzalez has changed the Internet-law landscape - even if, ironically, more people now know about his 1990s-era financial difficulties than ever before. The Court of Justice of the European Union has enormous powers. But even so, the Internet is hard to censor. Indeed, that characteristic is what makes it such an important technology for furthering free expression and democratic debate - and why it's a thorn in the side of every authoritarian and would-be censor who longs for the days when information was much easier to control. Gonzalez doesn't see himself as a proponent of --censorship.‖ But make no mistake: That's what it is. The European Court of Justice's ruling sets up a system whereby private companies are forced, by government, to block information at the behest of citizens who would like knowledge about themselves to be hidden from public view. It's not as if the court ordered Google to censor information whose publication was in violation of existing laws. Indeed, the auction notice that Gonzalez asked to have removed from Google's search results was required to be made available, in order to comply with the principle that trial proceedings generally must be open to the public. It did not violate copyright or libel laws - yet the court nevertheless decided the information was --inadequate, irrelevant and excessive,‖ and therefore should be removed. 
786. Robert Larson, (M.A. Student, Mass Communication, U. Minnesota), 
COMMUNICATION LAW AND POLICY, Winter 2013, 118. The final First Amendment theory to be discussed here is Vincent Blasi's checking value theory. Motivated by the concerns about the abuses of government officials expressed in works by John Locke and Cato, as well as later American Revolution era writers, Blasi's theory posits that free speech is necessary to prevent abuse of the trust and power that society invests in public officials and the government. In many ways, the theory may be seen as a corollary to the self-governance theory, and it arises out of the same democratic principles undergirding Meiklejohn's theory. The checking value theory suggests that robust protection of First Amendment speech and press freedoms allow people to report and discuss official dereliction, thus granting the citizens a --veto power to be employed when the decisions of officials pass certain bounds.‖ However, while Meiklejohn's self-governance theory is concerned primarily with the right of citizens to discuss matters with which the government may disagree, Blasi's checking value theory is focused on the right of the press to expose to the public government actions with which the public disagrees. 
787. Richard Peltz-Steele, (Prof., Law, U. Massachusetts School of Law), 
GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW, Winter 2013, 367. The simple picture of irreconcilable conflict across the Atlantic conceals nuances on both sides. An observer of American constitutional law from a comparative perspective is impressed on the one hand by the free speech imperative of the First Amendment, of which the firm rule against prior restraint is a part. The imperative posits free speech as the presumptive winner when it comes into conflict with other interests, such as statutory prohibitions, or even with other constitutional rights. To lose out, the free speech claim must be rebutted by countervailing interests, few of which can measure up. The observer is impressed on the other hand by the weak development in American constitutional law of rights of personality, including reputation and privacy. Lacking the full constitutional gravitas of free speech, these --rights‖ fare poorly when they run up against the American free speech imperative. 
788. Peter Fleischer, (General Privacy Counsel, Google), FOGGY THINKING 
ABOUT THE RIGHT TO OBLIVION, Feb. 11, 2011. Retrieved Oct. 5, 2014 from 
http://peterfleischer.blogspot.com/2011/03/foggy-thinking-about-right-to-  [HYPERLINK: http://peterfleischer.blogspot.com/2011/03/foggy-thinking-about-right-to-]
oblivion.html. If someone else posts something about me, should I have a right to delete it? Virtually all of us would agree that this raises difficult issues of conflict 
between freedom of expression and privacy. Traditional law has mechanisms, like 
defamation and libel law, to allow a person to seek redress against someone who publishes untrue information about him. Granted, the mechanisms are time- consuming and expensive, but the legal standards are long-standing and fairly clear. But a privacy claim is not based on untruth. I cannot see how such a right could be introduced without severely infringing on freedom of speech. 
789. Paul Connolly, (Staff), BELFAST TELEGRAPH, June 13, 2014, 28. The recent 
ruling by the EU's highest court that citizens have a ‗right to be forgotten' is, I believe, a blow not just against freedom of expression, but against public access to information. It's not particularly the ruling as such - there does have to be a balance with the right to privacy - but it is the catch-all, unjustifiable and uncertain nature of the judgment that rankles. Never mind the restriction on public access to information, the ruling''s reference to the right to restrict material that is --irrelevant, outdated, or otherwise inappropriate‖ is vague and will, I predict, keep armies of lawyers in jobs for years. I fear the law of unintended consequences will apply, as hordes of people with backgrounds to hide use it for a range of selfish reasons. 
790. Adam Thierer, (Sr. Fellow, Mercatus Center, George Mason U.), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Spr. 2013, 422. The difficulty is that the right to information privacy - my right to control your communication of personally identifiable information about me - is a right to have the government stop you from speaking about me. We already have a code of --fair information practices,‖ and it is the First Amendment, which generally bars the government from controlling the communication of information (either by direct regulation or through the 
authorization of private lawsuits), whether the communication is --fair‖ or not. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	73 
 
 
791. Jesse Kline, (Staff), NATIONAL POST, July 2, 2014, A10. Gonzalez doesn't 
see himself as a proponent of --censorship.‖ But make no mistake: That's what it is. The European Court of Justice's ruling sets up a system whereby private companies are forced, by government, to block information at the behest of citizens who would like knowledge about themselves to be hidden from public view. It's not as if the court ordered Google to censor information whose publication was in violation of existing laws. Indeed, the auction notice that Gonzalez asked to have removed from Google's search results was required to be made available, in order to comply with the principle that trial proceedings generally must be open to the public. It did not violate copyright or libel laws - yet the court nevertheless decided the information was --inadequate, irrelevant and excessive,‖ and therefore should be removed. 
792. Simon Breheny, (Dir., Legal Rights Project, Institute of Public Affairs), THE 
AGE, July 16, 2014, 39. The right to be forgotten makes every man a censor. Put simply, anyone who finds material online that they disagree with now has the power to force Google to remove it. Following the ruling, European search engines have been inundated with requests. Some of the tens of thousands of requests include a business seeking to have negative feedback on a review website removed, convicted criminals seeking to have articles about their crimes deleted, and an individual suspended from their job wants articles about the suspension taken down. These examples demonstrate how absurd this regime will be. A one-star customer rating on Yelp is not ideal from the business-owner's perspective but these feedback mechanisms are an essential part of 21st century life. 
793. Steve Kuncewicz, (Media Lawyer, Bermans), CITY A.M., May 19, 2014, 21. In 
this case, the European Court of Justice (ECJ) has got it completely wrong. Those arguing that its ruling is a successful move towards --the right to be forgotten‖ are quite simply incorrect; it is going to be of huge detriment to freedom of speech and freedom of information. This is already apparent with individuals, intent on rewriting their own history, having already requested that Google remove links to articles referring to their past. Making intermediaries, like Google, responsible for the actions of the content produced by other people will inevitably lead to greater surveillance and a risk of censorship. 
794. Cooper Mitchell-Rekrut, (Executive Editor), GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF 
INTERNATIONAL LAW, Spr. 2014, 881-882. If a right to be forgotten under the Regulation aspires to even approximate the idealistic vision that informs it, the most effective way to accomplish this goal is through search engine censorship. As Professor of Internet Governance and Regulation at the Oxford Internet Institute Viktor Mayer-Schenberger noted, --if you carry out a search on yourself and it no longer shows up . . . you have effectively been deleted.‖ Although objectionable personal data may continue to exist in trace forms, that which cannot be found through a search engine is effectively, if not actually, erased. Further, The European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) conducted a study on the technological feasibility of a right to be forgotten and concluded that the only way to meaningfully achieve such erasure is to attack the availability of data at the search engine level. This reflects the practical experience of complainants in Spain, such as Mr. Gonzalez, who care more about whether the data is accessible than whether it exists. Realistically, then, the right to be forgotten in many instances is attainable only by search engine censorship, a method against which I will argue in the 
following Part. [ellipsis in original] 
795. Meg Leta Ambrose, (Ph.D. Candidate, ATLAS Institute at Colorado U.), 
STANFORD TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, Winter 2013, 371. The prospect of content --adjustment‖ in the name of privacy has exposed cultural variations on perspectives of the global village. The right to be forgotten has gained traction in Europe as a legal mechanism for handling such information issues and has been named a top priority by the European Commission as it redrafts the 1995 E.U. Data Protection Directive (E.U. Directive). A reaction to the outcry over the permanence of digital information, the right essentially transforms public information into private information upon request of the data subject, also described as --the right to silence on past events in life that are no longer occurring.‖ This concept of oblivion, however, is controversial and has been called --rewriting history,‖ --personal history revisionism,‖ and --censorship‖ in the U.S. 
796. Adam Thierer, (Sr. Fellow, Mercatus Center, George Mason U.), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Spr. 2013, 423-424. Though well- intentioned, the Eraser Button concept - like the --right to be forgotten‖ - raises clear First Amendment issues by limiting the right of others to speak freely or to collect, analyze, or redistribute information they find online. For example, individuals might be able to --claim a right to be forgotten or ask to hit the Eraser Button when a journalist or historian pens an article about them,‖ something --[t]hat would be a direct affront to the First Amendment since journalistic freedoms apply even when 
minors are the subject of reports or histories.‖ 
797. Allyson Stuart, (Prof., Law, Charleston School of Law), NORTH CAROLINA 
JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Mar. 2014, 466. The primary problem with the application of a right to be forgotten in the United States is that any information posted online is considered speech, including compiled information from a search engine, and any effort to delete such information other than by the original poster implicates the speech of search engines. The First Amendment strongly protects such speech from any limitation. In addition, the Communications Decency Act and its safe harbor immunize Internet service providers from liability with respect to speech of websites. 
798. Robert Larson, (M.A. Student, Mass Communication, U. Minnesota), 
COMMUNICATION LAW AND POLICY, Winter 2013, 120. It appears that the differences between the long tradition of vigorously protecting free speech and the concepts of obscurity and the right to be forgotten are irreconcilable. To adopt these measures - or, perhaps more accurately, to have them inflicted on us as a result of the global reach of the Internet - would upset not only a century of First Amendment jurisprudence, scholarship and ideals, but would fly in the face of the principles upon which the United States was founded. 


799. Richard Peltz-Steele, (Prof., Law, U. Massachusetts School of Law), GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW, Winter 2013, 368. The --right to be forgotten‖ is one small part of the proposed EU regulation, but it exposes the crux of the problem. Under the proposal, a person may demand the removal of personal information from data processing and dissemination. Prohibiting the subsequent dissemination of truthful information, lawfully obtained, defies the American free speech imperative. Worse from the American perspective, the rebutting privacy claim is not necessarily even an interest of constitutional magnitude. Any reasonably identifying information triggers the EU regulatory framework, because the broader right of personality animates the regulation, not the 
narrower American conception of privacy in the intimate or --highly offensive.‖ 
800. Robert Larson, (M.A. Student, Mass Communication, U. Minnesota), 
COMMUNICATION LAW AND POLICY, Winter 2013, 119. The concept of a privacy interest arising out of the obscurity of information, as a socionormative principle, and the right to be forgotten, as a legal mechanism concerned with the European idea of dignity-based privacy, are both fundamentally at odds with the established theories that undergird the American First Amendment right of freedom of speech. The self-fulfillment theory opposes such measures because they deny the would-be speaker the ability to decide what to say and think, and deny the would-be listener the information desired to form his opinions and ideas. The marketplace of ideas theory rejects them because they are contrary to the normal function of communication, because they limit the degree to which people may participate in the marketplace of ideas, and because they grant the legislature a power best left to the people. 
801. Jasmine McNealy, (Prof., Journalism, Syracuse U.), NORTHERN KENTUCKY 
LAW REVIEW, 2012, 120. Although EU member states hail the creation of this right to be forgotten as improving individual privacy rights, such a right creates a problem for U.S. online news organizations. Not only does such law come into direct conflict with protections found in the First Amendment, but it also conflicts with traditional privacy jurisprudence, which states that information made public cannot become private again. 
802. Peter Fleischer, (General Privacy Counsel, Google), FOGGY THINKING 
ABOUT THE RIGHT TO OBLIVION, Feb. 11, 2011. Retrieved Oct. 5, 2014 from 
http://peterfleischer.blogspot.com/2011/03/foggy-thinking-about-right-to-  [HYPERLINK: http://peterfleischer.blogspot.com/2011/03/foggy-thinking-about-right-to-]
oblivion.html. In privacy circles, everybody's talking about the Right to be Forgotten. The European Commission has even proposed that the --right to be forgotten‖ should 
be written into the up-coming revision of the Privacy Directive. Originally, a rather 
curious French --universal right‖ that doesn't even have a proper English-translation (right to be forgotten? right to oblivion? right to delete?), le Doit a l'Oubli, is going mainstream. But, what on earth is it? For most people, I think it's an attempt to give people the right to wash away digital muck, or delete the embarrassing stuff, or just start fresh. But unfortunately, it's more complicated than that. More and more, privacy is being used to justify censorship. In a sense, privacy depends on keeping some things private, in other words, hidden, restricted, or deleted. And in a world where ever more content is coming online, and where ever more content is find-able and share-able, it's also natural that the privacy counter-movement is gathering strength. Privacy is the new black in censorship fashions. It used to be that people would invoke libel or defamation to justify censorship about things that hurt their reputations. But invoking libel or defamation requires that the speech not be true. Privacy is far more elastic, because privacy claims can be made on speech that is true. 
803. USA TODAY, May 15, 2014, 9A. The very notion of government imposing a 
statute of limitations on free speech rights is creepy. The rules associated with such a regime would be nightmarish, and they would undoubtedly set off a stampede of politicians and other powerful people trying to sanitize their pasts. The European court believes it can finesse the issue by leaving content alone but restricting the method by which people get at it. It's a bit like telling a newspaper publisher he can say anything he wants, so long as he doesn't distribute his paper beyond a few close friends. The ruling doesn't have a direct bearing on Internet users in the United States. Nor are U.S. courts likely to follow suit, thanks to the First Amendment. But if European courts apply enough penalties, Google could amend its practices in ways that limit Americans' searches on European topics. In the extreme, it could lead to Europe erecting digital walls that fragment what is now a borderless Internet. Questions of privacy and free speech involve a very delicate balance. The European court has most definitely not found it. 
804. NPA BULLETIN, July 9, 2014. Retrieved Oct. 6, 2014 from Nexis. Google has 
been inundated with requests for links to be removed - more than 40,000 in the first four days after the ruling, according to CNN. The search company came under scrutiny this week by journalists including The Guardian's James Ball for deleting links that would normally appear when searched for using only specific terms - for example, a subject's name or even, it seems, the name of a person who commented on the article - based on perceived relevancy. Do we really have a right to be forgotten? --Absolutely not,‖ Ms Simons said. --We have a right to privacy and that's a whole different debate - that was the exactly the pivot of the debate that we had around news media regulation in the last few years in Australia. --It is, of course, a concern when there is inaccurate information out there or information that is under dispute,‖ Ms Simons said, --but I would much rather see a legislated right of reply or 
legislated right to correction than a legislated right to forget.‖ 
805. Jonathan Owen, (Staff), THE INDEPENDENT, July 4, 2014, 1. And 
Wikipedia's co-founder Jimmy Wales, a member of an expert panel set up by Google to help it deal with the controversy, condemned the European ruling as --an utter and complete disaster‖ and branded it --a major human rights violation‖. The judgment is --clear and direct censorship of the worst kind,‖ he said. 
806. Allyson Stuart, (Prof., Law, Charleston School of Law), NORTH CAROLINA 
JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Mar. 2014, 483. There was a massive outcry in the United States when the EU announced its proposal of an Internet right to be forgotten. The media raised the specter of online censorship, of an --Internet Delete Button [that] Would Create Chaos.‖ Scholars like Jennifer Chandler argue that --the right to be forgotten transforms Facebook, Google, Reddit, and Twitter into censors, charged with evaluating whether a particular bit of expression has artistic or journalistic merit or otherwise constitutes free expression.‖ But here too a growing number of people have sought to take down or minimize information on the Internet, including bringing lawsuits against search engines, and all signs point to this increasing. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	74 
 
 
807. USA TODAY, May 15, 2014, 9A. At first blush, this week's surprise ruling by 
Europe's top court that people have a --right to be forgotten‖ on the Internet might seem appealing. After all, who among us wouldn't like to see some embarrassing photo, or other unflattering details about our past, just go away? But in ordering Google to sever links to information considered humiliating or irrelevant, even if the information is accurate, the Court of Justice of the European Union has erred. The court is blaming the messenger. And it is doing so in a way that attacks free speech, one of the fundamentals of democratic society. 
808. Meg Leta Ambrose, (Ph.D. Candidate, ATLAS Institute at Colorado U.), 
STANFORD TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, Winter 2013, 386. The most obvious objection is that the right to be forgotten violates freedom of expression, because it would allow the user to limit the speech of others about her. Jeffrey Rosen has articulated this point, arguing that --[a]lthough there are proposals in Europe and around the world . . . that would allow us to escape our past, these rights pose grave threats to free speech.‖ He cautions that --[u]nless the right is defined more precisely when it is promulgated over the next year or so, it could precipitate a dramatic clash between European and American conceptions of the proper balance between privacy 
and free speech, leading to a far less open Internet.‖ [ellipsis in original] 
809. Jeffrey Rosen, (Prof., Law, George Washington Law School), FORDHAM 
LAW REVIEW, Mar. 2012, 1534. The potentials for abuse of this right to be forgotten are obvious. Pop stars who take racy pictures often have a habit of running for political office, especially in Italy. You could well imagine a candidate on the campaign trail, thinking better of those youthful pictures and trying to remove all references to herself in order to protect herself from embarrassment. Enforcement is also difficult. Against whom is the right of action? Just Google and Yahoo? Against faithless friends who share the photographs? Under what circumstances should photographs be left up in the public interest? Do we want a --commission of forgetfulness‖ to be making case-by-case determinations of what is in the public's 
interest to demand? 
810. Allyson Stuart, (Prof., Law, Charleston School of Law), NORTH CAROLINA 
JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY, Mar. 2014, 488. When Google presents a list of website links and information in response to a user's search query, Google is in effect saying --these are the relevant search results.‖ This is speech in the form of opinion protected against abridgement by the government. The fact that it takes place on the Internet does not diminish its protection. 
811. Mark Bartholomew, (Prof., Law, State U. of New York at Buffalo Law School), 
NEBRASKA LAW REVIEW, 2014, 781. To many First Amendment scholars, however, it is unclear why a speaker's motive should ever matter, particularly when primary consideration is given to the First Amendment interests of listeners. If First Amendment interests are meant to turn on the value or harm of the speech to others, the speaker's state of mind should be disregarded. The motivations of communicators seem largely irrelevant if the First Amendment is meant to facilitate the search for truth or provide information for democratic self-governance. 
812. Emily Shoor, (Articles Editor), BROOKLYN JOURNAL OF 
INTERNATIONAL LAW, 2014, 487-488. The proposed Right to Be Forgotten empowers individuals to assert greater control over their reputations and identities on the Internet, but further analysis reveals glaring issues with its effect on freedom of expression and notions of privacy. This controversial right would grant individual citizens the ability to demand the permanent removal of personal content from the Internet. This could be content posted either by themselves or by third parties. While the Regulation provides exceptions for content deemed artistic, journalistic, or literary, it leaves the determination of what constitutes an exception to the entity in charge of its removal (i.e. Google or Facebook). Furthermore, it penalizes companies for noncompliance. This has the potential to forcefully transform the role of these Internet companies from hosts to censors. 
813. Emily Shoor, (Articles Editor), BROOKLYN JOURNAL OF 
INTERNATIONAL LAW, 2014, 508. With potential penalties of up to 1% of a company's global annual revenue, --enterprises‖ such as Google will be incentivized to comply with all takedown requests in fear of the supervisory authority issuing crippling penalties. The Regulation requires these companies to determine what content falls within the exceptions for --literary, artistic or journalistic‖ content, forcing these enterprises into the role of global censors. This new requirement puts enterprises in a new role not previously required of them and tasks them with the substantial obligation of analyzing personal content. 
814. Steven Bennett, (Prof., Law, Hofstra Law School), BERKELEY JOURNAL OF 
INTERNATIONAL LAW, 2012, 163-164. Recent developments in Spain and Italy have amplified public discussion on the right to be forgotten. In early 2011, Spanish data protection authorities demanded that Google remove links to online news articles on grounds that the articles contained out-of-date information which infringed on the privacy of Spanish citizens. At about the same time, Italy announced that it would regulate Internet content sites as if they were television broadcasters and would impose an obligation to publish --corrections‖ to libelous content. These developments followed a case in Germany in 2009, where two murderers, who had completed their prison sentences, sued to remove references to their crime from Internet postings. In early 2010, moreover, an Italian court found several Google executives guilty of violating Italian privacy law by permitting a video of abuse of a disabled boy to persist on its online video service. These developments suggested the broad uses to which a comprehensive --right to be forgotten‖ might be implemented. 
815. Meg Leta Ambrose, (Ph.D. Candidate, ATLAS Institute at Colorado U.), 
STANFORD TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, Winter 2013, 387. Finally, Vint Cerf has criticized the right to be forgotten as unachievable stating, --You can't go out and remove content from everybody's computer just because you want the world to forget about something.‖ While the right to be forgotten does not suggest removing files from personal computers, Cerf's point highlights that --forgetting‖ must necessarily mean degrees of accessibility. 
816. USA TODAY, May 15, 2014, 9A. The search engines are modern tools for 
acquiring knowledge and should not be blamed for the fact that the World Wide Web has a long memory. In fact, search engines have given people unprecedented ability to research the reputations of dates and doctors, candidates and contractors - an 
ability that will be compromised if those reputations can be airbrushed on demand. 


817. Jasmine McNealy, (Prof., Journalism, Syracuse U.), NORTHERN KENTUCKY LAW REVIEW, 2012, 119. In late 2010, Harvey Purtz filed a small claims lawsuit against Rajesh Srinivasan. The filing of a small claims suit would normally be insignificant, but Purtz's reason for doing so makes the case interesting. Purtz claimed that Srinivasan had subjected him and his wife to intentional infliction of emotional distress by refusing to remove articles about Purtz's son from the Daily Californian newspaper's online archives. The newspaper articles, more than four years old at the time, detailed Chris Purtz's drunken confrontation with the staff at a San Francisco strip club. Purtz was suspended from the UC Berkeley football team after the incident. He finally left the team in February 2007 for personal reasons, and died in June 2010. A month after Chris' death, Harvey Purtz contacted Srinivasan, the then editor- in-chief of the Daily Californian, and requested that the articles about his son be removed from the online archive. Srinivasan declined, citing company policy that content only be removed if it qualifies for a retraction. Purtz subsequently filed a lawsuit seeking $7,500 in damages. In his opinion ruling in favor of Srinivasan, the small claims judge noted that he was sympathetic to the pain Purtz had endured from the loss of his child. However, this gave Purtz neither the standing nor the basis for a claim against Srinivasan. The Purtz claim is interesting in that it appears to fly in the face of all traditional jurisprudence with respect to privacy and free expression. Although not specifically stating as much, Purtz was asserting a right to have information about his son, particularly negative information about his son, forgotten, erased from online archives. If allowed, an individual would be able to claim that the information about them contained in online newspaper archives was no longer necessary, and should therefore be removed. Such a right would conflict with the tradition of allowing the public to have access to information, and for news organizations to publish information of a public concern, including arrests and court cases. 
818. Kevin O'Grady, (Staff), BUSINESS DAY, July 23, 2014. Retrieved Oct. 6, 
2014 from Nexis. Exercising the ‗right to be forgotten' could spark ‗Streisand effect.' I always suspected that the European Court of Justice's ‗right to be forgotten' ruling might come back to haunt those who take advantage of it, and it looks like I was right. The ruling, handed down against Google in May, allows citizens to request that certain links about them be deleted from the search results of internet search companies such as Google. By last week, Google had received more than 70,000 such requests from individuals who want 250,000 webpages removed from its search results. 
819. Kevin O'Grady, (Staff), BUSINESS DAY, July 23, 2014. Retrieved Oct. 6, 
2014 from Nexis. But people taking advantage of the ruling should not underestimate the Streisand effect, described by Wikipedia as & the phenomenon whereby an attempt to hide, remove, or censor a piece of information has the unintended consequence of publicizing the information more widely, usually facilitated by the internet. It is named after American entertainer Barbra Streisand, whose attempt in 2003 to suppress photographs of her residence in Malibu, California, inadvertently generated further publicity. Similar attempts have been made, for example, in cease- and-desist letters, to suppress numbers, files and websites. Instead of being suppressed, the information receives extensive publicity and media extensions such as videos and spoof songs, often being widely mirrored across the internet or distributed on file-sharing networks. 
820. Karen Eltis, (Prof., Law, U. Ottawa), FORDHAM INTELLECTUAL 
PROPERTY, MEDIA & ENTERTAINMENT LAW JOURNAL, Fall 2011, 84. The counterargument to the right to be forgotten movement emphasizes its countervailing values - namely, freedom of expression, access to information and the integrity of the public record. 
821. Edward Carter, (Prof., Communication, BYU), EMORY INTERNATIONAL 
LAW REVIEW, 2013, 23-24. Actresses, models and athletes have brought some two hundred lawsuits, most filed by the lawyer Adolfo Martin Leguizamon Pena, against Google and Yahoo to demand removal of Internet search results and links to photographs. Many of the plaintiffs allege that Internet search results improperly associate their photographs - some of which are sexually suggestive and which were presumably taken and posted originally with permission - with pornography or prostitution. The most prominent of these cases in Argentina involves the Argentine pop singer Virginia Da Cunha, who prevailed against Google and Yahoo in a trial court in 2009 but lost on appeal in 2010. Another plaintiff is the combustible Argentine former soccer star and coach Diego Maradona. Argentina's Supreme Court has yet to weigh in on the issue, although one of the current cases eventually could make its way there. 
822. Katie Storey, (Staff), MANCHESTER EVENING NEWS, Sept. 26, 2014, 5. 
Mail Online publisher Martin Clarke described the move as ‗the equivalent of going 
into libraries and burning books you don't like'. A Google spokesman would not comment on individual stories, but said that while the company disagreed with the ruling by the European Union's Court of Justice, it had to respect it. 
823. Meg Leta Ambrose, (Ph.D. Candidate, ATLAS Institute at Colorado U.), 
STANFORD TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, Winter 2013, 396. These movements have produced two camps: Preservationists and Deletionists. Preservationists believe we owe the entire Internet to our descendants. Deletionists believe forgetting must be part of the Internet to support efficient, useful, and high quality information practices. As the above discussion outlines, it is possible that content can be easily accessible for a very long time, but permanence does not, at this point, appear to be a pervasive threat to most. Additionally, these two movements remind us that the Web is very young and has transformed greatly in the last 10 years. It may be that these harms are not pervasive enough to regulate, can be managed by other means, or do not justify a manipulation of the Web as it is still transitioning. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	75 
 
 
 
824. Peter Fleischer, (General Privacy Counsel, Google), FOGGY THINKING ABOUT THE RIGHT TO OBLIVION, Feb. 11, 2011. Retrieved Oct. 5, 2014 from 
http://peterfleischer.blogspot.com/2011/03/foggy-thinking-about-right-to-  [HYPERLINK: http://peterfleischer.blogspot.com/2011/03/foggy-thinking-about-right-to-]
oblivion.html. Engineers describe most auto-delete functionalities as 80% solutions, meaning that they never work completely. Just for the sake of debate, on one extreme, government-mandated auto-expire laws would be as sensible as burning down a library every 5 years. Even if auto-expire tools existed, they would do nothing to prevent the usual privacy problems when someone copies content from one site (with the auto-expire tool) and moves it to another (without the auto-expire function). So, in the real world, I suspect that an auto-expire functionality (regardless of whether it was optional or mandatory) would provide little real-world practical privacy protections for users, but it would result in the lose of vast amounts of data and all the benefits that data can hold. 
825. SUNDAY TIMES, July 6, 2014, 20. Censorship, the suppression of free speech 
and free expression, is a menace. When that censorship is endorsed by a legal judgment it becomes indefensible and sinister. When it also becomes so easy to bypass that even the technologically inept can do so, it becomes ridiculous and the law becomes an ass. That is the position the European Court of Justice (ECJ) has got into with its ill-conceived --right to be forgotten‖ judgment. When a Spanish lawyer, Mario Costeja Gonzalez, called on the court to rule in his favour over the removal from search engines of links to a short article about his past financial difficulties, it did so. Now we are seeing the consequences of that decision, made in May. Google has received 70,000 requests for links to articles to be removed, with about 8,000 from Britain. One such request, that it remove a link to a 2007 BBC article about Merrill Lynch and its then boss Stan O'Neal, shows how these things go wrong. When Google removed the link to the piece and informed its author, Robert Peston, that it had done so, the natural assumption was that a request from Mr O'Neal must have been behind it. Google subsequently revealed, however, that the request had come from a commenter on the article, not the former banker himself. 
826. Richard Peltz-Steele, (Prof., Law, U. Massachusetts School of Law), 
GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW, Winter 2013, 377. Businesses even within the European Union naturally are concerned that any cost savings from harmonization will be wiped out by additional burdens under the proposed regulation. For example, obtaining explicit consent initially and then again upon changes in data uses arguably will require costly recurring interactions between data controllers and subjects. More detailed reporting requirements in the proposed regulation, especially in the procedures in case of security breach, plus management of consents, revocations, erasures, etc. arguably will consume additional human resources. And the right to be forgotten triggers its uncertain range of required actions, along with possible pain of liability, especially with regard to third-party data partners. 
827. Steven Swinford, (Staff), THE DAILY TELEGRAPH, July 10, 2014, 4. The 
European Union will look like repressive regimes such as China unless it abandons the --right to be forgotten‖, a minister said yesterday. Simon Hughes, the Liberal Democrat justice minister, told peers that a European Court of Justice ruling which gave people the right to have search results removed from the internet was --impracticable, impossible and . . . a nonsense‖. He added that the freedom of the press and individuals to --say what's going on‖ was --hugely important‖ and must be protected. Britain will seek to have the so-called --right to be forgotten‖ dropped in a European directive which is currently being negotiated by member states. [ellipsis in 
original] 
828. Brian Lee Crowley, (Dir., Macdonald-Laurier Institute), THE LEADER-POST, 
May 26, 2014, A6. But if we think through the logic of this --right to be forgotten‖ it is no victory for humanity. That logic would require, for example, that we not stop at mere Internet links. After all, it is the availability of the underlying information that is the real issue. To be consistent, the court would have to order that all the old newspapers that Google linked to would have to be cleansed of the offending information. Turning old newspapers into Swiss cheese is a much more arresting image than the abstract --deletion of links‖ on a search engine. But that is exactly the principle the ECJ is admitting in its decision. If you find the idea of vandalizing the historical record appalling, you should find it just as appalling in cyberspace as in the newspaper morgue. That's because the past doesn't just belong to the people who played a role in it. It is the common heritage of us all. We have an abiding need to protect the integrity of the truth and completeness of that record. As George Orwell so chillingly reminded us in his novel Nineteen Eighty-Four, --He who controls the past controls the future. He who controls the present controls the past.‖ Still fresh in Orwell's mind were the Stalinist purges that resulted in people being expunged from the historical record, their faces erased from photos, their names expunged from the history books. 
829. Adam Thierer, (Sr. Fellow, Mercatus Center, George Mason U.), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY, Spr. 2013, 422. If privacy rights could trump speech and press rights in the fashion Brandeis and Warren suggested, a journalist would not be allowed to conduct her daily business without fear of running afoul of government regulation. Good reporting requires that journalists gather and report facts, many of a personal nature. If privacy rights were treated like intellectual property, robust privacy rights could trump free speech rights, even when the information being collected or distributed was truthful. Such a situation would raise significant First Amendment issues, even when mere data collection and dissemination are being undertaken. 
830. SUNDAY TIMES, July 6, 2014, 20. The richer and more powerful the 
complainant, the more likely the link is to be removed. A search engine, even one that has drafted in a team of paralegals, cannot be expected to judge whether removing a link is or is not in the public interest. 
831. Cooper Mitchell-Rekrut, (Executive Editor), GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF 
INTERNATIONAL LAW, Spr. 2014, 881. Numerous parties that have looked closely at a --right to be forgotten‖ have concluded that the right cannot be absolute, and it cannot be effectively guaranteed. Given the basically --open‖ nature of the internet and the prevalence of cheap and effective means of copying data, an absolute right to be forgotten is an impossible ideal. Further, data exist in myriad forms and may be inaccessible to even the most comprehensive effort to clear an undesired trace. 


832. Danny Hakim, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, May 30, 2014, B1. But the tech industry has portrayed the decision as a blow against the free flow of information on the web and a victory for those who want to cover up past misdeeds - including pedophiles, corrupt politicians and unscrupulous businesspeople. --A simple way of understanding what happened here is that you have a collision between a right to be forgotten and a right to know. From Google's perspective that's a balance,‖ Eric Schmidt, Google's executive chairman, said in recent comments on the decision. --Google believes, having looked at the decision, which is binding, that the balance that was struck was wrong.‖ Historically, many requests have been aimed at blocking wider access to what many would view as part of the public domain. 
833. Robert Larson, (M.A. Student, Mass Communication, U. Minnesota), 
COMMUNICATION LAW AND POLICY, Winter 2013, 114. The marketplace of ideas theory, therefore, stands in opposition to a right to be forgotten and to a right of privacy by obscurity for three reasons. First, such measures diminish the ability of people to participate in the marketplace of ideas and derogates the role of counterspeech. Second, they ignore or may even disrupt the natural process of communication and debate. And third, their adoption would misappropriate to a legislature a function that is reserved to marketplace participants. 
834. Robert Larson, (M.A. Student, Mass Communication, U. Minnesota), 
COMMUNICATION LAW AND POLICY, Winter 2013, 117. In several aspects, the theory of self-governance is intertwined the marketplace of ideas. It places a high value on the citizenry's ability to decide for itself whether and how it should use information. Given the theory's emphasis on the value to society, rather than the individual, the self-governance theory would seem to reject the idea that an individual has a right to determine whether a particular piece of information is of public concern. Thus, because both the proposed right to be forgotten and a privacy right based on obscurity strike this balance in favor of the individual, the self-governance theory stands in opposition to such measures. 
835. Robert Larson, (M.A. Student, Mass Communication, U. Minnesota), 
COMMUNICATION LAW AND POLICY, Winter 2013, 120. Privacy as obscurity and a right to be forgotten similarly conflict with the theory of self-governance because they vest with the government and with the individual the capacity to make decisions about what society may know and discuss. And the checking value theory rejects these measures because they abrogate the power of speech to encourage the pro-social behavior required of members of a civilized society. 
836. Lothar Determann, (Prof., Privacy Law, Freie U., Berlin), STANFORD 
TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, 2012. Retrieved Oct. 4, 2014 from Lexis. A right to be forgotten would also create a colossal administrative burden. Someone would have to pay for the detection and deletion of data that can end up in myriad accounts and places in social networks. Social media platform operators could either charge the data subject who exercises the right to be forgotten or all users. Commercially successful, well-established social media platform providers could also cover the compliance costs themselves out of profits generated through sales of advertising, but start-up companies with charge-free business models would be unduly burdened if they cannot pass on costs. This could further hamper innovation in Europe. 
837. Richard Peltz-Steele, (Prof., Law, U. Massachusetts School of Law), 
GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW, Winter 2013, 369. These claims keep Google counsel up at night. A person might employ the right to be forgotten to demand that Google purge from its data stores any identifying information to which the person objects - an unfavorable review of services or an embarrassing photo, regardless of truth, of previous consensual disclosure, or third- party content creator. Under the proposed regulation, domestic European authorities could bring Google, Inc. (U.S.) within reach of EU data protection enforcement (provided long-arm jurisdiction in domestic law), because Google, Inc., provides its services to EU citizens. Under data protection legislation, Google could face remedies that it would regard as censorship, including correction and redaction. Notwithstanding enforcement against a respondent's EU assets, an injunction against technological operations in the United States would set up a classic confrontation of foreign-judgment enforcement and First Amendment values. 
838. Paul Schwartz, (Prof., Law, U. California at Berkeley School of Law), 
HARVARD LAW REVIEW, May 2013, p. 2000. More controversially, the Proposed Regulation grants great power to the European Commission. It gives the Commission the authority under the consistency process to issue opinions to --ensure correct and consistent application‖ of the Regulation. At an initial stage, the national data protection authority must --take utmost account of the Commission's opinion.‖ Additionally, the Commission may require national data protection authorities --to suspend the adoption‖ of a contested draft measure. Thus, through the --consistency process,‖ the Proposed Regulation grants the Commission the final word on a wide range of matters concerning the interpretation and application of the Proposed Regulation throughout the EU and beyond. The Proposed Regulation also assigns the Commission the power to adopt --delegated acts‖ and --implementing acts‖ under a wide range of circumstances. 
839. Jeffrey Rosen, (Prof., Law, George Washington Law School), FORDHAM 
LAW REVIEW, Mar. 2012, 1533. In Europe, efforts to create legal remedies for the indignity of being tethered to your past on the internet are far more ambitious. An early proposal came from Alex Turk, the French data privacy commissioner, who endorsed the creation of a --right to oblivion.‖ You know this is coming from France. It is straight out of Sartre. Americans want to be famous while the French want to be forgotten. How exactly this was supposed to be administered is not clear. Turk proposed creating some kind of international body, perhaps an --international commission of forgetfulness,‖ which would evaluate, on a case-by-case basis, whether or not a particular request to take down a particular picture should be granted as an offense against the dignitary or moral rights of the offended individual. But the details remain murky. More recently, Viviane Reding, the EU Commissioner of Justice and Vice President of the European Commission, proposed to codify the 
--right to be forgotten.‖ 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	76 
 
 
 
840. Richard Peltz-Steele, (Prof., Law, U. Massachusetts School of Law), GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW, Winter 2013, 378. The right to be forgotten is an expression of an extant concept under the umbrella of rights of personality in Europe. The term in French is le droit l'oubli, or --right to oblivion,‖ which is at the same time enlightening and confusing. On the one hand, the concept smacks of a grand and absolute statement about a person's right to control her or his own destiny in all of time and space. But what that could possibly mean in terms of earthbound law and policy is not so easy to articulate. Social contract theory postulates that no person living in civilized society is wholly the master of her or his own ship. 
841. Shane Harris, (Fellow, New America Foundation), @WAR: THE RISE OF THE 
MILITARY-INTERNET COMPLEX, 2014, 213. Cyber espionage against US companies showed no signs of abating. --There isn't a computer system in this country of consequence that isn't penetrated right now with information going out at the terabyte lever former NSA director McConnell said during a speech in Washington in October, a claim echoed publicly and privately by numerous intelligence, military, and law enforcement officials. 
842. Melissa Hathaway, (Pres. Hathaway Global Strategies, Inc.), SECURING 
CYBERSPACE: A NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 146. Some estimates suggest that in the first quarter of 2011 security experts were seeing almost 67,000 new malware threats on the Internet every day. This means more than forty-five new viruses, worms, spyware, and other threats were being created every minute - more than double the number in January 2009. 
843. The Economist, CYBERCRIME, 2014, 145. Malware is exploding. It is 
typically used to steal passwords and other data, or to open a --back door‖ to a computer so that it can be taken over by outsiders. Such --zombie‖ machines can be linked up to thousands, if not millions, of others around the world to create a --botnet‖. Estimates for the number of infected machines range up to 100m. 
844. Derek Reveron, (Prof., National Security, U.S. Army War College), 
CYBERSPACE AND NATIONAL SECURITY: THREATS, OPPORTUNITIES, AND POWER IN A VIRTUAL WORLD, 2012, 7. In contrast to traditional warfighting domains such as land, air, or sea, governments are not the only powers in cyberspace. Rather, individuals can readily harness technology to compete on a global scale. And it is worth noting that virtualization will continue this trend of democratizing the Internet, giving individuals tremendous power that was unthinkable even ten years ago. Satellite imagery used to be highly classified and limited by the US intelligence community, but now anyone can access imagery from an iPhone using Google Earth. Likewise, the complexity and cost of building a nuclear weapon limits their production to governments, but the same cannot be said for the virtual weapon of mass destruction that can destroy data and networks, undermine international credibility, and disrupt commerce. Malicious activity through worms, viruses, and zombies regularly disrupts Internet activity. 
845. Patrick Meehan, (U.S. Representative, Pennsylvania), PROTECTING YOUR 
PERSONAL DATA: HOW LAW ENFORCEMENT WORKS WITH THE PRIVATE SECTOR TO PREVENT CYBERCRIME, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Apr. 16, 2014, 2. Recent cyber breaches at retailers, including Target, Nieman Marcus, and Michael's, have once again brought the public's attention to the threat of criminals accessing their personal information. Unfortunately, such data breaches are neither new nor rare. The Target attack alone comprised the information of approximately 110 million consumers, and it could be months, or even years, before we know how many of those customers will eventually be victims of fraud. In 2012, an estimated 16.6 million Americans experienced identity theft, costing consumers nearly $25 billion, so this problem is not going away. Just last week many people learned about the so-called Heartbleed 
vulnerability that affects the encryption software used in many e-commerce sites. 
846. John Dowdy, (Dir., McKenzie & Company), SECURING CYBERSPACE: A 
NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 130. The advantage currently lies with cyberattackers. As a result, if the government chooses not to act, the number of attacks will continue to increase - as growing online economic activity and data 
storage increase the incentive of the attackers - and U.S. competitiveness will suffer. 
847. David Opderbeck, (Prof., Law, Seton Hall U. Law School), WASHINGTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 2012, 797. Private and public cyber-infrastructure in the United States falls under nearly constant attack, often from shadowy sources connected to terrorist groups, organized crime syndicates, or foreign governments. These attacks bear the potential to disrupt not only e-mail and other online communications networks, but also the national energy grid, military-defense ground and satellite facilities, transportation systems, financial markets, and other essential facilities. In short, a substantial cyberattack could take down the nation's entire security and economic infrastructure. U.S. policymakers are justifiably concerned by this threat. 
848. Derek Reveron, (Prof., National Security, U.S. Army War College), 
CYBERSPACE AND NATIONAL SECURITY: THREATS, OPPORTUNITIES, AND POWER IN A VIRTUAL WORLD, 2012, 9. Retired army general Wesley Clark and Peter Levin argued that --all evidence indicates that the country's defenses are already being pounded, and the need to extend protection from computer networks and software to computer hardware is urgent. The US government can no longer afford to ignore the threat from computer-savvy rivals or technologically advanced terrorist groups, because the consequences of a major breach would be 
catastrophic.‖ 
849. Shane Harris, (Fellow, New America Foundation), @WAR: THE RISE OF THE 
MILITARY-INTERNET COMPLEX, 2014, xx. In October 2012 then defense secretary Leon Panetta warned that the United States was on the verge of a --cyber Pearl Harbor: an attack that would cause physical destruction and the loss of life, that would paralyze and shock the nation and create a profound new sense of 
vulnerability.‖ 


850. Peter Swire, (Prof., Law, Ohio State U. College of Law), COLUMBIA SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, Spr. 2012, 455. Second, cyber attacks are cheap while defense is costly. Hacking technology is widely available and, because attacks can be launched remotely, the offense incurs only nominal expense. Meanwhile, the defense is only as strong as its weakest point. Because attacks can be launched from anywhere on the web, defenders have to expend valuable resources in hopes of maintaining good security at every point. The defense needs to be strong everywhere, while the offense only needs to succeed in one place. 
851. Peter Swire, (Prof., Law, Ohio State U. College of Law), COLUMBIA 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, Spr. 2012, 455. Third, cyber attacks can be launched repeatedly. A physical burglar has to wait for the right moment to try to enter a house. But a remote hacker can search for vulnerabilities 24 hours a day, and can use automated attacks to continuously probe for weaknesses. 
852. Peter Swire, (Prof., Law, Ohio State U. College of Law), COLUMBIA 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, Spr. 2012, 456. Fifth, size matters less than in traditional physical-world attacks--an individual or small group of hackers has the potential to inflict damage disproportionate to their relative number or resources. When innumerable attractive targets exist, the offense can concentrate their attack efforts, but defenders are spread thin. 
853. Paul Day, (IT Specialist & White Hat Hacker/Founder, P/H-UK Magazine), 
CYBER ATTACK: THE TRUTH ABOUT DIGITAL CRIME, CYBER WARFARE AND GOVERNMENT SNOOPING, 2014, 14. Because of the explosion of the use of crime-ware on the internet, some security experts estimate that --every minute 232 computers are infected by malware‖. When malware is so easy to come by there is a plentiful supply of wannabe cyber-criminals. The entry level for sophisticated cybercrime is low and now requires little or no technical ability - attracting hoards of newbie cyber-criminals who want to steal your cash. Meanwhile the real money is falling into the pockets of the cyber-criminals who are vying to be the equivalent of a Darkside Microsoft - writing and selling crimeware for profit. 
854. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 86. Today we face a vexing situation, where high-profit criminality can occur with low risk of capture. This turns our deterrence model of law enforcement on its head. Deterrence only works when there is a credible threat of response and punishment (the degree of punishment mattering less than the degree of certainty of being caught). But, deterrence cannot work without attribution and the nature of cyberspace makes attribution viciously difficult. 
855. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE 
NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 267. Because cyber criminals can become rental cyber warriors, we need as the third agenda item to reduce the level of cyber criminality that is plaguing the Internet. Cyber criminals have begun to penetrate the supply chains for both computer hardware and software manufacturers to inject malicious code. Instead of just using widely available hacking tools, cyber criminals are now starting to write their own specially designed code to beat security systems, as was the case in the theft of millions of credit card numbers from T.J. Maxx in 2003. These trends point to the growing sophistication of cyber criminals, and may indicate that the criminal threat could grow to become as sophisticated as the state-level threat. That suggests we need to increase our efforts to combat cyber crime. 
856. Robert Belk, (Fellow, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard U.), 
SECURING CYBERSPACE: A NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 51. Cybercrime, most often perpetrated by organized syndicates, and cyberespionage, carried out on a massive scale by the Chinese, bleed the United States of tens of billions of dollars each year. The White House recognizes this fact: President Obama recently argued that --America's economic prosperity in the twenty- 
first century will depend on cybersecurity.‖ 
857. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE 
NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 146. The Chinese government has both the power and the means to disconnect China's slice of the Internet from the rest of the world, which it may very well do in the event of a conflict with the United States. The U.S. government has no such authority or capability. In the U.S., the Federal Communications Commission has the legal power to regulate but it largely chosen not to do that. 
858. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 39-40. Even more chillingly, some reports have suggested that our electronic grid and telecommunications systems have already been infiltrated by logic bombs (malicious code inserted in a system that will be set off only on instruction or when certain conditions are met). In 2009, the Wall Street Journal reported that software had been placed into our system, so that it could be detonated at a later date, presumably during the time of war. Doing so could cripple our economy and military capabilities at a time of crisis. Richard Clarke, the former cybersecurity czar, likens these cyber logic bombs to mines, and blames China for their placement. 
859. Marc Goodman, (Former Agent with FBI and Interpol; now Prof., Law, 
Singularity University), FUTURE CRIMES, 2015, 31. Of course it is not just the American military's technology that is being targeted by China, but rather a litany of Washington institutions, including law firms, think tanks, human rights groups, contractors, congressional offices, embassies, and any number of federal agencies. Moreover, a 2009 report by Canadian researchers at the Infowar Monitor, the SecDev Group, and the Citizen Lab at the University of Toronto uncovered the so-called GhostNet, "a vast global cyber espionage network" extending to 103 countries that was controlled by servers in China and targeted the Tibetan government in exile and the Dalai Lama himself. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	77 
 
 
 
860. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 39. Another display of Chinese capabilities occurred in April 2010, when the Internet was hijacked. Traffic on the Internet is, typically, routed through the most efficient route. Servers calculate that route based on a call-and- response interaction with other servers; in effect, downstream servers advertise their own carrying capacity and current load, thereby soliciting traffic. On April 8, 2010, China Telecom began broadcasting erroneous network traffic routes. As a result, American and other foreign servers were instructed to send Internet traffic through Chinese servers. In the end, according to the United States-China Economic and Security Review Commission, roughly 15 percent of the world's traffic was routed to China. This included official U.S. government traffic, as well as the traffic from any number of commercial websites. 
861. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE 
NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 54. Since the late 1990s, China has systematically done all the things a nation would do if it contemplated having an offensive cyber war capability and also thought that it might itself be targeted by cyber war; it has created citizen hacker groups, engaged in extensive cyber espionage, including of U.S. computer software and hardware, taken several steps to defend its own cyberspace, established cyber war military units, and laced U.S. infrastructure with logic bombs. 
862. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE 
NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 59. The extent of Chinese government hacking against U.S., European, and Japanese industries and research facilities is without precedent in the history of espionage. Exabytes of data have been copied from universities, industrial labs, and government facilities. The secrets behind everything from pharmaceutical formulas to bioengineering designs, to nanotechnology, to weapons systems, to everyday industrial products have been taken by the People's Liberation Army and by private hacking groups and given to China, Inc. 
863. Scott Shackelford, (Prof., Cybersecurity Law, Indiana U.), MANAGING 
CYBER ATTACKS IN INTERNATIONAL LAW, BUSINESS AND RELATIONS: IN SEARCH OF CYBER PEACE, 2014, 182-183. Numerous reports have been published about China's complicity in, and active state sponsorship of, cyber attacks against a huge array of targets. These attacks seem to be getting more frequent, spiking --from one or two per week in 2005‖ to more than fifty per day in 2008, according to Symantec, though it remains unclear how many of these attacks actually originated in China due to the attribution problem. For example, Chinese hackers have been widely reported to --have successfully penetrated the U.S. electrical grid. . . .‖ This is especially worrying because in March 2007, the Department of Energy conducted an experiment to see whether a power plant could be damaged by a cyber attack. Researchers were reportedly able to --cause a generator to shake, smoke, and 
shut down with a few keystrokes.‖ [ellipsis in original] 
864. The Economist, CYBERCRIME, 2014, 145-146. China, in particular, is accused 
of wholesale espionage, attacking the computers of major Western defence contractors and reputedly taking classified details of the F-35 fighter, the mainstay of future American air power. At the end of 2009 it appears to have targeted Google and more than a score of other IT companies. 
865. Scott Shackelford, (Prof., Cybersecurity Law, Indiana U.), MANAGING 
CYBER ATTACKS IN INTERNATIONAL LAW, BUSINESS AND RELATIONS: IN SEARCH OF CYBER PEACE, 2014, 75-76. There is a key distinction between how the United States and other countries, such as China, claim to view cyberspace. The United States has a stated policy of promoting a single --global networked commons‖ where freedom of speech is sacrosanct, so long as it has the ability to monitor that speech when needed through stepped-up wiretapping and surveillance. China on the other hand, along with many other nations, is viewed as building digital barriers in the name of Internet sovereignty. 
866. Shane Harris, (Fellow, New America Foundation), @WAR: THE RISE OF THE 
MILITARY-INTERNET COMPLEX, 2014, 191. Cyber warfare with the United States isn't in China's long-term interest. Economic competition is, however. The country has a pressing need to learn more about where US companies have found sources of energy, and how they plan to extract it. In part, that's to support China's ambitions in the energy sphere. But the country also needs to fuel a rapidly expanding economy, which, though it has slowed in recent years, still saw GDP growth of 7.8 percent from 2009 to 2013. 
867. Kevin Freeman, (Sr. Fellow, Center for Security Policy), GAME PLAN: HOW 
TO PROTECT YOURSELF FROM THE COMING CYBER-ECONOMIC ATTACK, 2014, 17. Cybertheft has long been a part of China's global security strategy. In 1995, Major General Wang Pufeng, a former director of the Strategy Department at the Academy of Military Science in Beijing, wrote, --The large-scale importation of information technology deep into the field of warfare will inevitably bring about a military revolution. This revolution has actually already started. . . . The issue of how to adapt to and achieve victory in the information warfare which we will face from now on is an important question which we need to study carefully.‖ 
[ellipsis in original] 
868. Kevin Freeman, (Sr. Fellow, Center for Security Policy), GAME PLAN: HOW 
TO PROTECT YOURSELF FROM THE COMING CYBER-ECONOMIC ATTACK, 2014, xvii. More than five years ago, I alerted the Pentagon that a war was under way. It was a new kind of war - unlike any we were prepared to face. And it almost ended our way of life, although few understood that reality at the time or since. Our enemies have telegraphed the how and why of this new kind of war for almost a decade. The Chinese People's Liberation Army even produced a book, Unrestricted Warfare, about new techniques to defeat a superpower, mocking our inability to recognize, let alone address, the threat. One of the best ways to break America, the Chinese know, is to hit our economy by waging financial warfare. 


869. Kevin Freeman, (Sr. Fellow, Center for Security Policy), GAME PLAN: HOW TO PROTECT YOURSELF FROM THE COMING CYBER-ECONOMIC ATTACK, 2014, 46. A common objection to my warning is that the Chinese are so connected to our economy that --they‖ would never harm us. The idea that --the Chinese‖ would never harm us is ridiculous on its face; there are Chinese who continually hack our systems and who manipulate and undermine our markets. But don't the Chinese hold so much in dollar debt that they couldn't afford to see the dollar go down? China's military doesn't care. It has a much longer view of things than the next quarter's export sales. 
870. Marc Goodman, (Former Agent with FBI and Interpol; now Prof., Law, 
Singularity University), FUTURE CRIMES, 2015, 32. The widespread denial-of- service attack against America's financial industry by Iran was shocking for its size and scope and for the massive volume of data generated by the perpetrators. "Some banks were hit with a sustained flood of traffic that peaked at 70 gigabits" per second. To put that volume of DDoS traffic in perspective, it is as if 1 billion people simultaneously phoned your bank, hung up, and immediately dialed back one second later. In order for your call (or visit to its Web site) to get connected, you would be number 1,000,000,001 on the list to get through. In other words, for all intents and purposes, you would never reach the bank. 
871. Kevin Freeman, (Sr. Fellow, Center for Security Policy), GAME PLAN: HOW 
TO PROTECT YOURSELF FROM THE COMING CYBER-ECONOMIC ATTACK, 2014, 19. Iran, too, has been attempting to hack U.S. financial institutions. The New York Times reported in January 2013 that Iran has been hacking American banks: --The attackers hit one American bank after the next. As in so many previous attacks, dozens of online banking sites slowed, hiccupped or ground to a halt before recovering several minutes later. . . . Security researchers say that instead of exploiting individual computers, the attackers engineered networks of computers in data centers, transforming the online equivalent of a few yapping Chihuahuas into a 
pack of fire-breathing Godzillas.‖ [ellipsis in original] 
872. Steve Chabot, (U.S. Representative, Ohio), ASIA: THE CYBER SECURITY 
BATTLEGROUND, House Foreign Affairs Comm. Hearing, July 23, 2013, 3. North Korea's growing cyber capabilities present the greatest likelihood of a cyber conflict in Asia. Earlier this year it demonstrated its capabilities in South Korea, where it crippled the operations of banks and news agencies by wiping the hard drives of thousands of computers. While McAfee's report on what is now called Operation Troy does not attribute these attacks to North Korea, it could not be clearer who was responsible. North Korea is not only a nuclear threat, but it a serious cyber threat as well. 
873. Scott Shackelford, (Prof., Cybersecurity Law, Indiana U.), MANAGING 
CYBER ATTACKS IN INTERNATIONAL LAW, BUSINESS AND RELATIONS: IN SEARCH OF CYBER PEACE, 2014, 186-187. Like China, Russia has been committed to developing its cyber warfare capabilities since the mid-1990s. Although never proven due to the difficulty of attribution, Russia has been linked to the cyber attacks on Estonia in 2007, Georgia and Lithuania in 2008, and Poland in 2009, among others. Indeed, Russian sponsorship stretches back to the original Moonlight Maze attacks of the late 1990s, and arguably even before that, beginning with --their Revolution in Military Affairs in the 1980s.‖ Over this time period, Russian cyber military doctrines have evolved --from computer network exploitation to computer 
network attack during the latter days of the second Chechen war from 1997 to 2001. 
874. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE 
NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 63. I focused on China because its cyber war development has been, oddly, somewhat transparent. U.S. intelligence officials do not, however, rate China as the biggest threat to the U.S. in cyberspace. --The Russians are definitely better, almost as good as we are,‖ said one. There seems to be a consensus that China gets more attention because, intentionally or otherwise, it has often left a trail of bread crumbs that can be followed back to Tiananmen Square. 
875. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE 
NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 63. The Russian nongovernmental hackers, including large cyber criminal enterprises, are a real force in cyberspace, as was demonstrated in the attacks on Estonia and Georgia discussed in chapter 1. The hacktivists and criminals are generally thought to be sanctioned by what used to be called the Sixteenth Directorate, a part of the infamous Soviet intelligence apparatus known as the KGB. Later it was called FAPSI. Few American intelligence officers could ever remember what FAPSI stood for (it's the Russian acronym for: Federal Commission for Government Communications and Information), they just knew it was --Moscow's 
NSA.‖ 
876. The Economist, CYBERCRIME, 2014, 147. Western spooks think China 
deploys the most assiduous, and most shameless, cyber spies, but Russian ones are probably more skilled and subtle. Top of the league, say the spooks, are still America's NSA and Britain's GCHQ, which may explain why Western countries 
have until recently been reluctant to complain too loudly about computer snooping. 
877. Kevin Freeman, (Sr. Fellow, Center for Security Policy), GAME PLAN: HOW 
TO PROTECT YOURSELF FROM THE COMING CYBER-ECONOMIC ATTACK, 2014, 19. Russian officials have observed our vulnerability to economic warfare. --[I]t is impossible to undermine such a big country like the U.S. through trade said the Russian intelligence expert and former KGB officer Konstantin Georgiyevich Preobrazhenskiy. --But it is possible through espionage, sabotage and other types of covert operations. Both Russia and China know the weaknesses of 
America and they use it as best they can.‖ 
878. David Opderbeck, (Prof., Law, Seton Hall U. Law School), WASHINGTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 2012, 799. China, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States employ extensive cyber spying networks. A coordinated series of denial-of-service and other attacks could cripple a state's political and communications systems, as happened during "Web War 1" between Russia and Estonia in 2007. Cyberattacks can directly impact "real" infrastructure: "As computer networks collapse, factories and chemical plants explode, satellites spin out of control 
and the financial and power grids fail." 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	78 
 
 
 
879. Marc Goodman, (Former Agent with FBI and Interpol; now Prof., Law, Singularity University), FUTURE CRIMES, 2015, 32. According to the former FBI director Robert Mueller, there were at least 108 nations with dedicated cyber-attack 
units going after industrial secrets and critical infrastructure alike, including Iran. 
880. Paul Day, (IT Specialist & White Hat Hacker/Founder, P/H-UK Magazine), 
CYBER ATTACK: THE TRUTH ABOUT DIGITAL CRIME, CYBER WARFARE AND GOVERNMENT SNOOPING, 2014, xiii. The second major cyber-threat is cyberwar. Who is attacking our computers? Hacktivists, cyber-terrorists and cyber- warriors are a modern threat in cyberspace. The trend towards modern digital warfare by many countries is obvious. Modern power blocs, such as the USA, China, Russia and Israel, are actively researching, building and deploying cyber weapons. 
881. The Economist, CYBERCRIME, 2014, 145. Criminals usually look for easy 
prey. But states can combine the criminal hackers' tricks, such as spear phishing, with the intelligence apparatus to reconnoitre [survey] a target, the computing power to break codes and passwords, and the patience to probe a system until it finds a weakness - usually a fallible human being. Steven Chabinsky, a senior FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] official responsible for cybersecurity, recently said that --given enough time, motivation and funding, a determined adversary will always - 
always - be able to penetrate a targeted system.‖ 
882. Kelly Gable, (Prof., Public International Law, Drexel U.), POLICING THE 
INTERNET, 2012, 50. Hackers scan U.S. government computer systems literally thousands of times a day, looking for a way in. In 2001, hackers successfully attacked an electric power grid in California and a seaport in Houston; more recently, hackers planted malicious software in the U.S. power grid, oil and gas distribution computer systems, telecommunications networks, and computer systems of the financial services industry. 
883. Joseph Nye, Jr., (Prof., Government, Harvard U.), SECURING CYBERSPACE: 
A NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 11. Last March, the U.S. Department of Defense reported that in one of the largest cyberattacks in U.S. history, unidentified hackers targeted the Pentagon, stealing approximately 24,000 files, some of which contained highly sensitive information on aircraft avionics, surveillance technologies, satellite communications systems, and network security protocols. 
884. Kelly Gable, (Prof., International Law, Drexel U.), POLICING THE 
INTERNET, 2012, 42. Other significant examples of cyberterrorism in the past few years include the theft of information regarding the new U.S. military stealth fighter jet, the hacking into the U.S. Air Force's air traffic control systems, and Titan Rain, which is the codename given by the U.S. government to a series of intelligence- gathering cyberattacks conducted by a group of Chinese hackers. Furthermore, these are only the most publicized of examples - every day cyberterrorists attempt to undermine national and international security and wreak havoc in order to further their terrorist agendas. In a single day in 2008, for instance, hackers targeted the Pentagon with six million attempts to access its computer system. 
885. David Opderbeck, (Prof., Law, Seton Hall U. Law School), WASHINGTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 2012, 801. The Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation recently reported that "during 2008, there were 54,640 identified cyberattacks against the Department of Defense; in 2009, there were 71,661 incidents reported; and through June 30 of 2010, there were 60,026 incidents reported." Most analysts now agree that cyberwar is inevitable. 
886. James Lewis, (Sr. Fellow, Center for Strategic and International Studies), 
SECURING CYBERSPACE: A NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 117. Cyberattack on its own, however, will not win a conflict, particularly against a large and powerful opponent. It is not a --decisive‖ weapon, but a new military capability that combines global reach and high speed with a payload that is less destructive than kinetic weapons. Militaries will use cyberattack to complement other capabilities: The immediate goal of a cyberattack will be to create confusion and uncertainty among opposing commanders, by attacking networks and data. 
887. Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 406. Tough nuclear weapons and other sensitive sites are not connected physically to the Internet, but battlefield command, communications, control, and Intelligence (C 3 I) systems are linked to the Internet and are therefore subject to cyberterrorism. 
888. Derek Reveron, (Prof., National Security, U.S. Army War College), 
CYBERSPACE AND NATIONAL SECURITY: THREATS, OPPORTUNITIES, AND POWER IN A VIRTUAL WORLD, 2012, 6. As it relates to war, the Internet is both a means and a target for militaries. Former US deputy defense secretary William J. Lynn underscored how important the information infrastructure is to national defense. --Just like our national dependence [on the Internet], there is simply no exaggerating our military dependence on our information networks: the command and control of our forces, the intelligence and logistics on which they depend, the weapons technologies we develop and field - they all depend on our computer systems and networks. Indeed, our 21st century military simply cannot function 
without them.‖ 
889. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE 
NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 227. The U.S. military is highly vulnerable to cyber attack. The U.S. military is --netcentric,‖ bringing access to databases and information further down into the operation of every imaginable type of military organization. Along with that access to information systems has come dependence upon them. One small sign of things to come was reported in late 2009. Insurgents in Iraq had used twenty-six-dollar software to monitor the video feeds of U.S. Predator drones through an unencrypted communications link. 


890. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 260. The U.S. military's reliance upon cyber systems exceeds the extensive dependence of the commercial infrastructure. The contractors required for America to fight a war may be immobilized by cyber attack. The allegedly hermetically sealed computer networks upon which the Department of Defense relies may prove porous and unavailable. Highly advanced technology in the conventional weapons and systems that give U.S. forces dominance (for example, the F-35 fighter and the Global Positioning System) may suddenly not work. 
891. Marc Goodman, (Former Agent with FBI and Interpol; now Prof., Law, 
Singularity University), FUTURE CRIMES, 2015, 30. It is when governments turn their attention (and budgets) to offensive cyber operations that we can see the full range of vulnerabilities in the hardware and software upon which we depend and that our common technological frailty is fully exposed. Though a $50,000 criminal extor- tion demand against Symantec or even a $1 billion hacking loss at Target remains noteworthy and surely merits our attention, it is chump change compared with the computer spying breach of the Pentagon's $300 billion F-35 Joint Strike Fighter project -- the most expensive Defense Department weapons program in history. 
892. Omer Tene, (Prof., Law, Haim Striks School of Law), COLORADO 
TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL, 2014, 399. Third, the distinction between domestic and foreign communications is muddled. Indeed, the crisis in international relations resulting from the Snowden revelations, particularly between the European Union and the United States, is rooted in the fact that large amounts of foreign communications are routed through or stored in the United States. At the same time, a large volume of domestic communications has cross-border elements, such as connections with foreign websites, services or counterparties. 
893. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 226. As a corollary to the idea of active defenses (and to the conception that the cyber domain is pervasive), any policy needs to recognize that huge swathes of essential government activity involve communications via networks that are predominantly operated by the private sector. Much as steel factories were essential to the construction of battleships, Internet communications companies have become an essential component of effective government activity. This is yet another reason why any active defenses must, inevitably, be deployed on nongovernment networks. In other words, the best defenses (whether government or private) must operate in the private-sector domain. 
894. Omer Tene, (Prof., Law, Haim Striks School of Law), COLORADO 
TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL, 2014, 398. Second, defending national infrastructure is complicated by the interdependence of military and private networks. Indeed, the Internet itself emerged from the military domain, as have technologies, software and applications such as mobile phones and encryption tools. The vulnerability of such networks and connected infrastructure presents a menacing threat to the functioning of society. This includes risks not only to military assets and critical infrastructure but also to peripheral networks and even individual devices, which could be used as discreet gateways to stage focused attacks. Lord Cameron of Dillington famously coined the phrase that --no society stands more than nine meals 
away from total anarchy.‖ 
895. Omer Tene, (Prof., Law, Haim Striks School of Law), COLORADO 
TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL, 2014, 400. Finally, the distinction between foreign intelligence and domestic law enforcement has blurred, as national security risks infiltrate domestic borders through the activities of rogue actors on the ground as well as the spread of malicious code to critical infrastructure. The Review Group pointed out that --today, no battlefield lines or Iron Curtain separates the communications in combat zones from the rest of the world. A vulnerability that can be exploited on the battlefield can also be exploited elsewhere.‖ It also noted that --in recent decades, the global nature of the Internet has enabled daily cyberattacks on the communications of government, business, and ordinary Americans by hackers, 
organized crime, terrorists, and nation-states.‖ 
896. Roland Heickero, (Prof., Swedish National Defense College), THE DARK 
SIDES OF THE INTERNET: ON CYBER THREATS AND INFORMATION WARFARE, 2013, 12. In cyber space there are no clear boundaries between military and civilian infrastructure; they are integrated and interdependent, since they often share the same communications networks. As long as nations depend on computer networks for their basic economic and military power, and as long as these can be accessed from the outside and the inside by people with bad intentions, there are thus risks. 
897. David Opderbeck, (Prof., Law, Seton Hall U. Law School), WASHINGTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 2012, 802. Experts suggest that cyber attacks against critical infrastructure potentially could physically destroy infrastructure, depriving large populations of essential goods and services for extended periods of time and threatening lives. 
898. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE 
NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 208. There are cyber war corollaries to escalation control. A cyber attack on a nation's air defense system would lead that country's leadership to the logical conclusion that air attacks were about to happen. In Exercise South China Sea, there were U.S. aircraft carriers nearby. If the Chinese military thought that those carriers were getting ready for air strikes on China, they would be right to take preemptive steps to sink the carriers. So, a cyber attack on the air defense network could have caused the beginning of a kinetic war that we were seeking to avoid. Even an attempted penetration of that network to lay in trapdoors and logic bombs might have been detected and interpreted as a prelude to imminent bombing. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	79 
 
 
899. Joe Lieberman, (U.S. Senator, Connecticut), SECURING AMERICA'S 
FUTURE: THE CYBERSECURITY ACT OF 2012, Senate Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Feb. 16, 2012, 1. Every day, rival nations, terrorist groups, criminal syndicates, and individual hackers probe the weaknesses in our most critical computer networks, seeking to steal government and industrial secrets or to plant cyber agents in the cyber systems that control our most critical infrastructure and would enable an enemy, for example, to seize control of a city's electric grid, water supply system, our Nation's financial system, or mass transit networks with the touch of a key from a world away. 
900. Abdel Atwan, (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 256. America now has a ‗Cyber Command' unit within its military apparatus, as do its rivals for global influence such as China and Iran. In June 2011, Chinese military experts declared that cyber-warfare is now a military priority, ‗Just as nuclear warfare was the strategic war of the industrial era, so cyber warfare is the strategic war of the information era,' spokesmen told Reuters. ‗It is a form of battle that is massively destructive and 
concerns the life and death of nations.' 
901. Susan Collins, (U.S. Senator, Maine), SECURING AMERICA'S FUTURE: 
THE CYBERSECURITY ACT OF 2012, Senate Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Feb. 16, 2012, 5. Earlier this month, the FBI Director warned that the cyber threat will soon equal or surpass the threat from terrorism. He argued that we should be addressing the cyber threat with the same intensity that we have applied to the terrorist threat. Director of National Intelligence (DNI) James Clapper made the point even more strongly, describing the cyber threat as a --profound threat to this country, to its future, its economy, its very well-being.‖ In November, the Director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) warned that malicious cyber attacks threaten a growing number of the systems with which we interact every day - the electric grid, water treatment plants, and key financial systems. 
902. David Opderbeck, (Prof., Law, Seton Hall U. Law School), WASHINGTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 2012, 797. Cyberspace is as vulnerable as it is vital. The threat is real. President Obama recently declared that "cyber threat is one of the most serious economic and national security challenges we face as a nation" and that "America's economic prosperity in the 21st century will depend on cybersecurity." Cybersecurity has been described as "a major national security problem for the 
United States." 
903. Michael Chertoff, (Former Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland Security), 
SECURING AMERICA'S FUTURE: THE CYBERSECURITY ACT OF 2012, Senate Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Feb. 16, 2012, 110. Malicious cyber intrusions on privately owned networks may well be carried out - and even mounted - from or through platforms that are privately owned and domestic. These attacks currently steal billions of dollars in intellectual property. Worse yet, crippling of our privately owned transportation networks or our major financial institutions could have a catastrophic national impact, comparable to the effects of a major physical attack. 
904. Roland Heickero, (Prof., Swedish National Defense College), THE DARK 
SIDES OF THE INTERNET: ON CYBER THREATS AND INFORMATION WARFARE, 2013, 12. The web makes anonymity possible. Intentions can be hidden in the cyber fog. At the same time, anonymity means that there is a risk that the wrong culprit is singled out and that defence measures against an attack are disproportionate - that the defending party resorts to more advanced cyber weapons against the party that is believed to have initiated the attack. That way, there is a risk that a conflict escalates very quickly. 
905. Shane Harris, (Fellow, New America Foundation), @WAR: THE RISE OF THE 
MILITARY-INTERNET COMPLEX, 2014, 193. Beginning in September 2012, banks across the United States found themselves in the cross hairs of what appeared to be a relatively common form of cyber attack. It wasn't the banks' money the hackers were after but their websites, which allow customers to log in to their accounts, check balances, pay bills, and transfer money. The attackers flooded the banks' web servers with traffic sent from other computers that were under their control, overwhelming them and causing the sites to crash. Dozens of bank sites were hit, causing significant disruptions in business for Bank of America, Wells Fargo, Capital One, Citigroup, HSBC, and other marquee and lesser-known institutions. 
906. The Economist, CYBERCRIME, 2014, 147-148. A loss of confidence in 
financial data and electronic transfers could cause economic upheaval. An even bigger worry is an attack on the power grid. Power companies tend not to keep many spares of expensive generator parts, which can take months to replace. Emergency diesel generators cannot make up for the loss of the grid, and cannot operate indefinitely. Without electricity and other critical services, communications systems and cash dispensers cease to work. A loss of power lasting just a few days, reckon some, starts to cause a cascade of economic damage. 
907. Shane Harris, (Fellow, New America Foundation), @WAR: THE RISE OF THE 
MILITARY-INTERNET COMPLEX, 2014, 184-185. The potential customer base for government-supplied cyber intelligence, sold through corporations, is as diverse as the US economy itself. To obtain the information, a company must meet the government's definition of a critical infrastructure: --assets, systems, and networks, whether physical or virtual, so vital to the United States that their incapacitation or destruction would have a debilitating effect on security, national economic security, national public health or safety, or any combination thereof.‖ That may seem like a narrow definition, but the categories of critical infrastructure are numerous and vast, encompassing thousands of businesses. 
908. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE 
NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 246. Because of the interlocking nature of major global financial institutions, including individual banks, even a cyber attack on one nation's financial infrastructure could have a fast-moving ripple effect, undermining confidence globally. And, as one Wall Street CEO told me, --It is confidence in the data, not the gold bullion in the basement of the New York Fed, that makes the world financial 
markets work.‖ 


909. Paul Day, (IT Specialist & White Hat Hacker/Founder, P/H-UK Magazine), CYBER ATTACK: THE TRUTH ABOUT DIGITAL CRIME, CYBER WARFARE AND GOVERNMENT SNOOPING, 2014, xiii. The state-of-the-art cyber attacks on utilities, transportation, communication and financial systems can be used to cripple 
the economy of a country and bring it to a standstill without a single shot being fired. 
910. David Opderbeck, (Prof., Law, Seton Hall U. Law School), WASHINGTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 2012, 801. The distribution of malware designed to harvest personal and corporate information now is largely run by syndicates, many based in Russia, Nigeria, China, Brazil, or other organized crime havens, that control networks of tens of millions of infected computers called "botnets." Cybercrime may cost the U.S. economy $ 1 trillion annually, and cybercriminals frequently launder money through "virtual" worlds, such as Second Life. Moreover, "there is a growing swell of opinion that [terrorist] hackers will eventually be bold enough and powerful enough to launch attacks that will damage and destroy critical national infrastructure." In short, cybercrime, cyberterrorism, and cyberwar are synergistically blending into a massive perfect storm over the nation's information infrastructure. 
911. John Dowdy, (Dir., McKenzie & Company), SECURING CYBERSPACE: A 
NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 130. The stakes are high. Cyberattacks seriously challenge U.S. competitiveness by threatening two of the core drivers of U.S. economic prosperity: intellectual property (owned by both government and the private sector) and the Internet. Both government and business leaders need to respond to the threat. Government is already investing in defending its own assets, but it cannot afford to stand aside with regard to assets held by the private sector for two reasons. First, some areas of the private sector are important in government's own supply chain; second, the private sector's intellectual property is vital for economic prosperity. 
912. L. Rush Atkinson, (Prof., U.S. Dept. of Justice, Security Division), 
VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW, Oct. 2013, 1350. Finally, security threats involve much greater potential costs than everyday criminal enterprises. The costs of international terrorism are obvious, as are those of espionage leading to the loss of military and nuclear secrets. The United States also loses billions of dollars to state- sponsored economic espionage and cyberattacks. 
913. John Dowdy, (Dir., McKenzie & Company), SECURING CYBERSPACE: A 
NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 134. Intellectual property and Internet-based commerce are two major drivers of U.S. economic growth and prosperity; cyberattacks threaten both. Innovative intellectual property generates significant current wealth and future growth: The World Intellectual Property Organization estimates that 45 to 75 percent of the wealth of individual companies comes from their intellectual property rights. In total, intellectual property makes an estimated contribution of over $8 trillion to the U.S. economy. 
914. Joe Lieberman, (U.S. Senator, Connecticut), SECURING AMERICA'S 
FUTURE: THE CYBERSECURITY ACT OF 2012, Senate Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Feb. 16, 2012, 1. The current ongoing and growing cyber threat not only threatens our security here at home, but it is right now having a very damaging impact on our economic prosperity because extremely valuable intellectual property is being stolen regularly through cyber exploitation by individuals, groups, and countries abroad and is then being replicated without the initial cost of research done by American companies, meaning that jobs are being created abroad that would otherwise be created here. 
915. Susan Landau, (Fellow, Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, Harvard U.), 
JOURNAL ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS & HIGH TECHNOLOGY LAW, Spr. 2013, 5. In January 2010 Google announced an intrusion and the theft of some of its proprietary code. In fact similar intrusions and cyberexploitations had already been conducted against a wide swath of U.S. businesses and government sites, including Adobe, BP, Conoco Philips, Disney, Dow Chemical, DuPont, ExxonMobil, General Dynamics, General Electric, Intel, Johnson & Johnson, Juniper Networks, Morgan Stanley, Northrup Grumman, Oak Ridge National Laboratories, RSA, Sony, Symantec, and Yahoo. 
916. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 26. Perhaps somewhat more authoritatively, the U.S. Government Accountability Office, repeating an estimate made by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), believes that in 2005 the annual loss due to computer crime was approximately $67.2 billion for U.S. organizations. The estimated losses associated with particular crimes include $49.3 billion in 2006 for identity theft and 
$1 billion annually due to phishing. 
917. The Economist, CYBERCRIME, 2014, 144. Mr. Obama has quoted a figure of 
$1 trillion lost last year [2009] to cybercrime - a bigger underworld than the drugs 
trade, though such figures are disputed. Banks and other companies do not like to admit how much data they lose. In 2008 alone Verizon, a telecoms company, recorded the loss of 285m personal-data records, including credit-card and bank- account details, in investigations conducted for clients. 
918. Paul Day, (IT Specialist & White Hat Hacker/Founder, P/H-UK Magazine), 
CYBER ATTACK: THE TRUTH ABOUT DIGITAL CRIME, CYBER WARFARE AND GOVERNMENT SNOOPING, 2014, xii. Cybercrime has funded the rise of a New Dark Economy, where the installation of remote access trojans (RATs) facilitates the theft of banking information - allowing the theft of up to $3,000,000 in a single digital heist. The digital mafia is the cyber-equivalent of organised crime, with a boss and an organisation such as the Russian Business Network as allies. 
919. John Dowdy, (Dir., McKenzie & Company), SECURING CYBERSPACE: A 
NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 131. Sony, for example, has announced that it expects its recent data loss will cost the company $173 million, but others have estimated costs of up to $1.5 billion. And the costs of security breaches are not contained to the company alone: Sony's share price fell by 7 percent and Lockheed Martin's fell by 4 percent in the days following their attacks, with resultant losses to shareholders of $2.2 billion and $1.0 billion, respectively. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	80 
 
 
 
920. David Opderbeck, (Prof., Law, Seton Hall U. Law School), WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 2012, 800. Every aspect of the U.S. economy and infrastructure depends on digital interconnections. Leading cybersecurity writer Richard Clarke suggests that "cyber war places this country [the United States] at greater jeopardy than it does any other nation." Indeed, many experts believe that, even now, computer hackers in China, including those working on behalf of the Chinese government and military, have penetrated deeply into the information systems of U.S. companies and government agencies, stolen proprietary information from American executives in advance of their business meetings in China, and, in a few cases, gained access to electric power plants in the United States. 
921. Kevin Freeman, (Sr. Fellow, Center for Security Policy), GAME PLAN: HOW 
TO PROTECT YOURSELF FROM THE COMING CYBER-ECONOMIC ATTACK, 2014, 3. The fact is that our global markets are highly vulnerable. They have been for years. That vulnerability allowed the market's collapse in 2008 and the economic decline from which we still suffer. And it could lead to something far worse if we do nothing. 
922. John Dowdy, (Dir., McKenzie & Company), SECURING CYBERSPACE: A 
NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 134. Similarly, the Internet is a remarkable engine for growth. A recent publication by the McKinsey Global Institute estimates that the Internet accounts for 3.4 percent of GDP in the thirteen countries examined and 21 percent of GDP growth in mature economies in the last five years. For the United States, this translates into additional total output of $440 to $580 billion, or $1,400 to $1,900 per capita - a contribution comparable to that made by the transportation, education, communication, agriculture, utilities, and mining sectors. 
923. Robert Belk, (Fellow, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard U.), 
SECURING CYBERSPACE: A NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 51. Most policy analysis in Washington focuses myopically on cyberwar and potentially catastrophic attacks against critical infrastructure. As noted above, however, cyberwar is by far the least likely form of cyberattack. The most significant risks to the United States in cyberspace are daily cyberattacks that undermine our national economic competitiveness. 
924. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE 
NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 145-146. As former Admiral McConnell has noted, --Because we are the most developed technologically - we have the most bandwidth running through our society and are more dependent on that bandwidth - we are the most vulnerable.‖ We have connected more of our economy to the Internet than any other nation. Of the eighteen civilian infrastructure sectors identified as critical by the Department of Homeland Security, all have grown reliant on the Internet to carry out their basic functions, and all are vulnerable to cyber attacks by nation-state actors. 
925. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE 
NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 226. At the moment, the United States has a greater dependency upon cyber- controlled systems than potential adversary nations. Other nations such as South Korea or Estonia may have greater consumer access to broadband. Others such as the United Arab Emirates may have more Internet-capable mobile devices per capita. But few nations have used computer networks as extensively to control electric power, pipelines, airlines, railroads, distribution of consumer goods, banking, and contractor support of the military. 
926. Marc Goodman, (Former Agent with FBI and Interpol; now Prof., Law, 
Singularity University), FUTURE CRIMES, 2015, 29-30. Even the infamous 2002 Bali bombing mastermind, Imam Samudra from the al- Qaeda-linked terrorist group Jamaah Islamiyah, funded his attack in which more than 200 people were murdered with the $150,000 he obtained by hacking into Western bank accounts and credit lines. Samudra was technologically savvy and while in prison wrote an autobiographical manifesto containing a chapter titled "Hacking, Why Not?" In the book, Samudra shared his hacking and "carding" techniques with his disciples, encouraging them "to take the holy war into cyberspace by attacking U.S. computers, with the particular aim of committing credit card fraud, called 'carding,'" to fund operations. Terrorists seem to be getting the message, and both the 2004 Madrid bombings at the Atocha train station, in which 190 people were killed and nearly 2,000 wounded, and the 7/7 London bombings, in which 52 civilians were slain and over 700 injured, were funded in whole or in part through hacking and credit card fraud. 
927. Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 406. Cyberterrorists who are politically motivated can inject systems with cyberweapons including: malicious software (malware), viruses, Trojan horses (which facilitate unauthorized access to the user's computer system), worms, self-replicating computer program logic bombs, and sophisticated computer codes, to corrupt, erase, or change data. Terrorists indulge in these acts to advance political, religious or ideological causes by violence. 
928. Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 409. Cyberterrorism or cyberwar is a new silent and powerful weapon for holy warriors. It lets them remain hidden, in unknown locations, as they attempt to gain unauthorized access to information infrastructures. It is difficult to identify the source of a cyber attack, and for this reason there are no effective ways to deter further damage, either by retaliating or taking preventive measures. 

929. Abdel Atwan (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 242. Obviously, Anonymous is not a jihadi organisation but its material and methodology are widely available, and its activities may suggest a template for the future of cyber-jihad. The group produces ‗cyber-weapons' which can be downloaded on the Internet. During the Arab Spring, protestors armed themselves digitally with Anonymous's so-called Low Orbit Ion Cannon (LOIC) which produces massive DDoS attacks. The software infects the targeted computer networks with a virus which then enables the attackers to take control remotely. The affected computers are then instructed to send information in such overwhelming volumes that the server collapses. All legitimate traffic is blocked, resulting in huge financial losses for businesses. Anonymous has recently released another cyber-weapon called #Ref Ref which uses the targeted site's own processing power against itself, causing resource exhaustion. 
930. Abdel Atwan (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 240. Cyber-jihad is attractive to AQAM for several reasons: it is cheap but has potentially devastating consequences; unlike physical, military confrontation, it is not asymmetric, relying largely on innovation; there are no physical barriers or checkpoints in cyberspace; attacks can be carried out from anywhere in the world and can affect a large number of targets and people. In addition, forward defence planning by governments and the military is extremely difficult given the rapid rate at which technologies are developing. Although so-called cyber-forensics are improving, the majority of Internet malefactors remain untraceable. 
931. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE 
NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 136-137. While al Qaeda has thus far not been capable of staging a cyber attack, that could very well change. As with any developing technology, the cost and other barriers to entry are going down each year. Staging a devastating cyber attack would not require a major industrial effort like building a nuclear bomb. Understanding the control software for an electric grid, however, is not a widely available skill. It is one thing to find a way to hack into a network, and quite another to know what to do once you're inside. A well-funded terrorist group might find a highly skilled hacker club that would do a cyber attack in return for a lot of money, but that has not happened to date. One of the reasons for that may simply be that most hackers think that al Qaeda members are crazy, dangerous, and untrustworthy. When criminal hacker groups think of others that way, you know the real terrorists are pretty far out there. 
932. Roland Heickero, (Prof., Swedish National Defense College), THE DARK 
SIDES OF THE INTERNET: ON CYBER THREATS AND INFORMATION WARFARE, 2013, 13. A computer found by U.S. forces in one of al-Qaeda's buildings in Kabul contained a model of a virtual dam. Apart from the model there was a programme that simulated what effects there would be on people and equipment if the dam broke. The direction and propagation of the water masses could be calculated. The example shows that al-Qaeda's activists are well versed in the use of computers during tactical planning of operations. 
933. Abdel Atwan, (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 255. Cyber-security experts are in agreement that it is only a matter of time before AQAM manage to pull off a cyber ‗spectacular.' Consider the impact of AQAM gaining control over a nuclear facility, an air traffic control system, an energy grid, defence and security networks, transit systems, emergency systems, refineries, dams and so on. The remote-controlled drone system which has decimated the AQAM leadership must surely be a target. 
934. Michael Leiter, (Former Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), 
COUNTERTERRORISM POLICIES AND PRIORITIES: ADDRESSING THE EVOLVING THREAT, Senate Foreign Relations Comm. Hearing, Mar. 20, 2013, 11. In addition, and generally unlike al-Qaeda affiliates, the specter of Hezbollah or Iranian-sponsored cyber attacks is disturbingly real. Recent Distributed Denial of Service (DDOS) attacks on major U.S. financial institutions, as well as even more destructive Iranian-sponsored attacks on Saudi Aramco and Qatar-based RasGas, have highlighted the extent to which physical attacks might be combined with cyber attacks. 
935. Abdel Atwan, (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 263. The profile of third-generation recruits to AQAM is little changed from their predecessors in that they are generally well educated and from the middle classes. These young people are Internet-savvy and technologically adept; US security services point to an escalating risk of serious cyberattack. This generation has also adapted new IEDs and car bombs to evade detection and jamming devices provided by Western security and arms firms. 
936. Marc Goodman, (Former Agent with FBI and Interpol; now Prof., Law, 
Singularity University), FUTURE CRIMES, 2015, 29. Not only are terrorists using the Internet for operational support and planning, but they have turned to both hacking and cyber crime as means of funding and carrying out their real-world terrorist operations. In June 2007, a U.K. terrorist cyber cell was disrupted by police when three British residents, Tariq al-Daour, Waseem Mughal, and Younes Tsouli, were charged with using the Internet to incite murder. Evidence presented showed that the men had used hacked credit card accounts to purchase goods to assist fellow jihadists -- items such as night-vision goggles, global positioning devices, airplane tickets, and prepaid mobile phone cards -- for the purpose of providing direct tactical support for terrorist operations. "The trio reportedly made fraudulent charges totaling more than 3.5 million U.S. dollars and was in possession of a database containing 
nearly 40,000 stolen credit card accounts." 
937. Kevin Freeman, (Sr. Fellow, Center for Security Policy), GAME PLAN: HOW 
TO PROTECT YOURSELF FROM THE COMING CYBER-ECONOMIC ATTACK, 2014, 11. The goal of these terrorist groups is not merely the destruction of Western classical liberalism and personal freedom. It is the evisceration of capitalism itself and its replacement with sharia-compliant finance (SCF), which bars interest. No wonder bin Laden explained right after 9/11, --The key pillars of the enemy should be struck, God willing. They shook America's throne and struck at the 
U.S. economy in the heart.‖ 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	81 
 
 
 
938. Kevin Freeman, (Sr. Fellow, Center for Security Policy), GAME PLAN: HOW TO PROTECT YOURSELF FROM THE COMING CYBER-ECONOMIC ATTACK, 2014, 78. Admiral J. Michael McConnell, who served as director of national intelligence under Presidents Bush and Obama, said that financial terrorists could take advantage of our reliance on technology: --What they will finally figure out is that crashing an airplane into a building gets them a lot of publicity, [but] at some point, they're going to move to different means. They will eventually, in my view, move to the soft underbelly of the country, which is the digital infrastructure and digital dependence. And when they figure that out, a relatively small group could do 
strategic damage.‖ 
939. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 4. The pervasiveness of cyberspace connectivity has also changed how we approach the gathering of intelligence and even economic espionage. Today, the theft of critical information can occur at a distance and with much greater ease than in the past. The wholesale degradation of secrecy threatens to erase our intellectual property, our competitive economic advantages, and our national security. Likewise, the same tools bid fair to strip average citizens of any privacy or anonymity they have in their private lives. When everything is connected to the Internet, adversaries can (and often will) destroy our secrecy and privacy almost at will. 
940. John Dowdy, (Dir., McKenzie & Company), SECURING CYBERSPACE: A 
NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 130. Unfortunately, our research suggests that while the private sector has significant economic value at risk from intellectual property theft, neither the high value of this intellectual property, nor its susceptibility to cyberattack is fully appreciated. Businesses tend not to prioritize cybersecurity, and the government is doing less to help businesses protect their intellectual property than it is doing to help protect critical national infrastructure or its own classified information. 
941. Melissa Hathaway, (Pres. Hathaway Global Strategies, Inc.), SECURING 
CYBERSPACE: A NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 145. Foreign governments and criminal networks are stealing our ideas, counterfeiting our goods, and putting our future economic wellbeing at risk. The number of businesses 
falling victim to these crimes increases daily, and no sector is without compromise. 
942. Susan Landau, (Fellow, Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, Harvard U.), 
JOURNAL ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS & HIGH TECHNOLOGY LAW, Spr. 2013, 6. In August 2010, the Department of Defense signaled its concern with these issues. Writing in Foreign Affairs, U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense William J. Lynn III stated, --although the threat to intellectual property is less dramatic than the threat to critical national infrastructure, it may be the most significant cyberthreat that the United States will face over the long term.‖ The 2011 report on economic espionage by the Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive describes an --onslaught of computer network intrusions originating from Internet Protocol (IP) addresses in China‖ and singles out China and Russia as being --the most aggressive collectors of 
US economic information and technology.‖ 
943. James Lewis, (Analyst, Center for Strategic and International Studies), 
SECURING AMERICA'S FUTURE: THE CYBERSECURITY ACT OF 2012, Senate Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Feb. 16, 2012, 94. But some in the hacker community say that some of the most skilled hackers in the world are among the ranks of Anonymous, a leading hacker group. We have some idea of their motivations, which are anti-government and anti-American, and of their inventiveness and skill, as they, like our nation-state opponents, have been able to exploit corporate networks with ease. 
944. Stewart Baker, (Visiting Fellow, Hoover Institution, Stanford U.), SECURING 
AMERICA'S FUTURE: THE CYBERSECURITY ACT OF 2012, Senate Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Feb. 16, 2012, 85. Computer exploits that we once thought were the work of large nations such as Russia or China now seem to be within the capability of countries like Iran and North Korea. If I am right that computer insecurity continues to grow worse each year, then the sophistication needed to launch a cyberattack will continue to decline, and soon such attacks will be within the capability of criminal gangs and online vigilantes like Anonymous. 
945. Scott Shackelford, (Prof., Cybersecurity Law, Indiana U.), MANAGING 
CYBER ATTACKS IN INTERNATIONAL LAW, BUSINESS AND RELATIONS: IN SEARCH OF CYBER PEACE, 2014, ix. In June 1982, there was a massive explosion deep in Siberia. It was not a missile test or nuclear accident. Rather, a gas pipeline had exploded, and it was not an accident. Soviet spies allegedly stole a Canadian company's software that had been implanted with a CIA-sponsored logic bomb, resulting in --the most monumental non-nuclear explosion and fire ever seen from space.‖ That was more than thirty years ago. 
946. James Lewis, (Sr. Fellow, Center for Strategic and International Studies), 
SECURING CYBERSPACE: A NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 117. Although malicious action in cyberspace is constant, there have been only two real cyberattacks. The UN Charter, The Hague and the Geneva Conventions make clear that an attack involves physical destruction and casualties. Only Stuxnet and the Israeli air raid on the alleged Syrian nuclear facility can therefore be considered attacks. 
947. Shane Harris, (Fellow, New America Foundation), @WAR: THE RISE OF THE 
MILITARY-INTERNET COMPLEX, 2014, xxiii. The United States is rapidly building its capacity to dominate cyberspace. In 2014 the government planned to spend more than $13 billion on cyber defense programs, mostly to protect government computers and networks, and to share threat intelligence with private industry. 
948. Shane Harris, (Fellow, New America Foundation), @WAR: THE RISE OF THE 
MILITARY-INTERNET COMPLEX, 2014, 185. It's inconceivable that every company on such a list could be considered --so vital to the United States‖ that its damage or loss would harm national security and public safety. And yet, in the years since the 9/11 attacks, the government has cast such a wide protective net that practically any company could claim to be a critical infrastructure. The government doesn't disclose which companies are receiving cyber threat intelligence. And as of now the program is voluntary. 


949. Richard Falkenrath, (Principal, The Chertoff Group), SECURING CYBERSPACE: A NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 161. --From now on,‖ President Obama declared in May 2009, --our digital infrastructure - the networks and computers we depend on every day - will be treated as they should be: as a strategic national asset. Protecting this infrastructure will be a national security priority. We will ensure that these networks are secure, trustworthy, and resilient. We will deter, prevent, detect, and defend against attacks and recover 
quickly from any disruptions or damage.‖ 
950. Juan Zarate, (Sr. Adviser, Center for Strategic and International Studies), 
TREASURY'S WAR: THE UNLEASHING OF A NEW ERA OF FINANCIAL WARFARE, 2013, 418. The innovation in public-private coordination is already occurring by necessity in the cyber-domain, with approximately 80 percent of the cyber-infrastructure in private-sector hands. After the attacks on Google servers by Chinese hackers, Google and the National Security Agency began to work together in 2010 to help Google defend against future attacks. In the wake of the massive attacks on US banks in 2012 and continuing into 2013, the National Security Agency has begun a pilot project with the banks to try to track and prevent cyber-attacks. This kind of collaboration opens the door for more creative and widespread public-private cooperation to tackle cyber-threats and serves as a testing ground for such collaboration on broader issues of national economic security. 
951. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 99-100. This analysis paints a good roadmap for how the government can (and has begun to) expand its presence into the private sector (where neither the sender nor the recipient is a federal employee or agency). The extension has begun through voluntary agreements with closely aligned government contractors in the Defense Industrial Base (DIB), known as the DIB Pilot. To foster their ability to do business with the federal government, those companies agree to monitor incoming Internet traffic using government-provided threat signature information. Here, again, as in the case of communications bound for the federal government, the noncontent addressing information is not protected by the Fourth Amendment; the senders have no expectation of privacy as against the recipient, and the recipient employees consent to scrutiny of the communications as a condition of employment. 
952. Shane Harris, (Fellow, New America Foundation), @WAR: THE RISE OF THE 
MILITARY-INTERNET COMPLEX, 2014, 196-197. The bank attacks were a test of national will. The NSA and the military would not respond with force unless the attackers threatened the transactional infrastructure of the financial services sector, or corrupted the accounts data so that they were no longer reliable. There'd have to be a crippling cyber attack that caused ripple effects in the broader society before the government would retaliate. Taking down a website, however frightening, wasn't justification for war. Nor was espionage. 
953. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 96. Einstein 2.0 is an intrusion detection cybersecurity system deployed by the federal government to protect the federal cyber networks. Its successor program, Einstein 3.0, not only detects cyber intrusions of the federal network but also seeks to actively prevent them. In the next iteration, these programs will increasingly be deployed on private networks to protect critical infrastructure. And, therein hangs a tale - and a Constitutional issue worthy of consideration. 
954. Omer Tene, (Prof., Law, Haim Striks School of Law), COLORADO 
TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL, 2014, 412. Moreover, cybersecurity threats in particular can be embedded into all layers of a communication, regardless of the distinction between content and metadata. This means that protecting computers, networks and infrastructure against cyber risks requires monitoring not only of metadata but also of contents. Hence, with respect to the United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team's (US-CERT) Einstein Program, an intrusion detection system that monitors the network gateways of government agencies for cybersecurity risks, Dempsey writes that: --the distinction between content and non-content is largely irrelevant to the Einstein debate, because Einstein undoubtedly captures and 
examines content, using a technique called deep-packet inspection.‖ 
955. Pauline Reich, (Prof., Internet Security, Waseda U. , Japan), LAW, POLICY, 
AND TECHNOLOGY: CYBERTERRORISM, INFORMATION WARFARE, AND INTERNET IMMOBILIZATION, 2012, 218. Einstein (also known as the EINSTEIN Program) is an intrusion detection system that monitors the network gateways of government departments and agencies in the United States for unauthorized traffic. The software was developed by the United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT), which is the operational arm of the National Cyber Security Division (NCSD) of the United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS). The first version examined network traffic while the expansion in development could look at content. 
956. Robert Belk, (Fellow, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard U.), 
SECURING CYBERSPACE: A NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 53. Networks controlled by the federal government are already subject to monitoring under a program run by the Department of Homeland Security known as --Einstein.‖ Many experts assert that unless the government expands this program to monitor the public Internet for potential threats, the nation will be essentially blind to potentially catastrophic cyberattacks. 
957. Omer Tene, (Prof., Law, Haim Striks School of Law), COLORADO 
TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL, 2014, 420. In its privacy impact assessment of the Einstein 3 system, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) explains the expanding scope of the Einstein programs: In brief, EINSTEIN 1 analyzes network flow records and EINSTEIN 2 detects and alerts to known or suspected cyber threats using Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) technology. EINSTEIN 2's network IDS technology uses custom signatures, based upon known or suspected cyber threats within federal network traffic. [Einstein 3] supplements EINSTEIN 2 by adding additional intrusion prevention capabilities and enabling ISPs, under the direction of DHS, to detect and block known or suspected cyber threats using indicators. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	82 
 
 
 
958. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 96. An intrusion detection system, like Einstein 2.0, operates through two principal systems. The first is what one might call a look-up system. Every piece of malicious code is unique; it has what is known as a signature (essentially, an identifying code component that serves as a marker for the program). When we spoke about the problem of distinction, we were speaking of the difficulty of identifying malicious code. Eventually, however, with effort, the code can be identified and its unique characteristics can be mapped. 
959. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 96-97. The second system, less definitive and more probabilistic, is what is known as anomaly detection. In essence, the Einstein 2.0 program knows what normal Internet traffic looks like and can produce an alert when the incoming traffic differs from normal by some set tolerance level. Notably, the Einstein 2.0 system is a gateway system that screens traffic as it arrives at federal portals and does not stop any traffic. 
960. Robert Belk, (Fellow, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard U.), 
SECURING CYBERSPACE: A NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 53. Recent media reports have emerged that the NSA has initiated a program called --Perfect Citizen‖ to monitor the networks connected to critical infrastructure, such as nuclear plants and the electric grid. Government surveillance of critical infrastructure connections to the Internet may already be a reality, then; but more widespread monitoring will certainly raise additional legal and policy challenges. 
961. Michael Chertoff, (Former Dir., U.S. Dept. of Homeland Security), SECURING 
CYBERSPACE: A NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 198. Because the effect of intrusions into these critical systems can be magnified for interdependent third parties, market-based incentives alone may not be sufficient to drive enough investment in security. Government is therefore a particularly important partner because it can leverage what Deputy Secretary Lynn described as 
--government intelligence capabilities to provide highly specialized active defenses.‖ 
962. John Dowdy, (Dir., McKenzie & Company), SECURING CYBERSPACE: A 
NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 137. Focusing on perimeter security against cyberattacks is akin to building a cyber Maginot Line. These attacks are not --easily addressed by just building the security walls higher and higher‖ because many of the characteristics of physical warfare do not apply. The defender no longer has the advantage: there is no need for proximity as the attacker can be based at any Internet-enabled computer in the world; the attacks are difficult to detect and often hard to attribute to a specific attacker; key assets to defend can be hard to identify as they are often intangible and distributed; and methods of attack are very difficult to predict. The tried and tested approaches of physical warfare (the perimeter, technological superiority, and the threat of retribution) are not nearly as effective against cyberattacks. In simple terms, technical solutions like firewalls and security software can only provide a small portion of the protection required. 
963. John Dowdy, (Dir., McKenzie & Company), SECURING CYBERSPACE: A 
NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 139. Private enterprises perceive little, if any, incentive to share amongst themselves details of attacks they have experienced. (Although in some industries the consciousness of mutual benefit is beginning to develop, for example the Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis Centre collects and shares cyberattack information in the financial sector; the board is formed of senior executives in the financial industry, while strategic sponsors come from the cybersecurity industry.) This second failure inhibits the development of protection approaches and technologies in a way that would not be possible with physical security, where it is visible and obvious when there has been a breach. As a result, private enterprise underestimates its incentive to protect itself from cyberattack, which leads to misalignment of the incentives of government with those of private enterprise and vendors, and therefore insufficient protection against cyberattack. This represents a continued threat to U.S. competitiveness. 
964. John Dowdy, (Dir., McKenzie & Company), SECURING CYBERSPACE: A 
NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 139-140. Cyberattacks pose a significant threat to the continued prosperity of the U.S. economy. Government needs to play an active role in ensuring that this threat is mitigated. To do this, policymakers should drive private enterprise to protect its intellectual property adequately, and support it in doing so. This could be achieved through supporting the security-economic complex to develop it into a fully functioning system in which the economic incentives of private enterprise and cybersecurity vendors align with government's incentive to protect long-term prosperity. 
965. John Dowdy, (Dir., McKenzie & Company), SECURING CYBERSPACE: A 
NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 140. Government needs to understand, and act on, its responsibility to protect both its own and private enterprise's intellectual property, as this intellectual property is vital to continued economic prosperity. To do this, policymakers need to consider how to reinforce the message within government that important assets are not only physical assets under government control, but also - and increasingly - digital, and owned by the private sector. 
966. James Comey, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), THREATS TO THE 
HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 62-63. One example of an effective public-private partnership is the National Cyber Forensics and Training Alliance, a proven model for sharing private sector information in collaboration with law enforcement. Located in Pittsburgh, the Alliance includes more than 80 industry partners from a range of sectors, including financial services, telecommunications, retail and manufacturing. The members of the Alliance work together with federal and international partners to provide real-time threat intelligence, every day. 


967. James Comey, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), THREATS TO THE HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 62. Here at home, the FBI serves as the executive agent for the National Cyber Investigative Joint Task Force (NCIJTF) which joins together 19 intelligence, law enforcement, and military agencies to coordinate cyber threat investigations. The FBI works closely with our all our partners in the NCIJTF, including the National Security Agency (NSA) and the Department of Homeland Security (DIIS). We have different responsibilities, but we must work together on cyber threat investigations to the extent of our authorities and share information among the three of us following the principle that notification of an intrusion to one agency will be notification to all. 
968. James Comey, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), THREATS TO THE 
HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 63. We intend to build more bridges to the private sector in the cyber security realm. We must fuse private-sector information with information from the Intelligence Community and develop channels for sharing information and intelligence quickly and effectively. In the last several years, the distribution of malicious software through networks of infected computers, or --botnets,‖ by online criminals has emerged as a global cybersecurity threat. As a response, the FBI developed Operation Clean Slate, a broad team effort to address this significant threat. Operation Clean Slate is the FBI's comprehensive public/private approach to eliminate the most significant botnet activity and increase the practical consequences 
for those who use botnets for intellectual property theft, or other criminal activities. 
969. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 99. Even more saliently, the content portions of an Internet transmission may also be the portions of a message that contain malware. Indeed, it would be an extremely poor rule that permitted screening of only noncontent information for malware, as that would simply draw a map for malfeasant actors as to how to avoid the intrusion detection systems. As a consequence, any intrusion detection or prevention system that we want to deploy must inherently have the ability to look at the content of communications if it is to be effective. 
970. Omer Tene, (Prof., Law, Haim Striks School of Law), COLORADO 
TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL, 2014, 412. Paul Rosenzweig supports this approach, stating that --it would be an extremely poor rule that permitted screening of only non-content information for malware, as that would simply draw a map for 
malfeasant actors about how to avoid the intrusion detection systems.‖ 
971. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE 
NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 68. Unlike with nuclear weapons, where an attacker may be deterred by the promise of retaliation or by the radioactive blow-back on his own country, launching a cyber attack may run fewer risks. In cyber war, we may never even know what hit us. Indeed, it may give little solace to Americans shivering without power to know that the United States may be about to retaliate in kind. 
972. Eric Schmidt, (Former Chief Technology Officer, Oracle America), THE NEW 
DIGITAL AGE: RESHAPING THE FUTURE OF PEOPLE, NATIONS AND BUSINESS, 2013, 182. Terrorism, of course, will never disappear, and it will continue to have a destructive impact. But as the terrorists of the future are forced to live in both the physical and the virtual world, their model of secrecy and discretion will suffer. There will be more digital eyes watching, more recorded interactions, and, as careful as even the most sophisticated terrorists are, even they cannot completely hide online. If they are online, they can be found. And if they can be found, so can their entire network of helpers. 
973. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 158. This cooperation agreement between Google and NSA is notable for a number of reasons. First, note the fact that Google turned to the NSA for assistance and not to the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), which has the nominal responsibility for assisting in the protection of private sector infrastructure. Second, the more fundamentally transformative aspect of the agreement is that Google looked to anyone in government at all for assistance. Google's business model is controversial in Silicon Valley. But, whatever one thinks of their commercial approach, nobody doubts their technical expertise. Google, along with other major cyber actors such as Facebook and PayPal, service providers like Verizon, and software manufacturers like Microsoft, is at the cutting edge of cyber innovations. Yet, even with that deep and sophisticated base of knowledge, Google was compelled to seek governmental assistance. 
974. John Dowdy, (Dir., McKenzie & Company), SECURING CYBERSPACE: A 
NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 135. Government has a legitimate role in protecting intellectual property in the private sector for two reasons. Most obviously, private sector intellectual property is actually an important part of the government's own supply chain: Problems in relevant part: of the private sector are problems for the government. The best recent example of this is the alleged theft of F-35 Joint Strike Fighter data from Lockheed Martin as the aircraft is destined for use by the U.S. armed forces and its allies. Secondly intellectual property is an important driver of the success of the overall economy and, as the Bipartisan Policy Centre makes clear, the success of the U.S. economy is one of the key drivers of America's global leadership: --in addition to its national security and military strength, America's global leadership derives from its economic vitality. As a result, 
the government has a clear duty to protect.‖ 
975. Peter Swire, (Prof., Law, Ohio State U. College of Law), COLUMBIA 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, Spr. 2012, 455. Cyber attacks differ in important respects from attacks in the physical world. First, attacks from a distance are much more common online. In the physical world, a thief has to enter an actual building in order to steal goods. By contrast, in cyberspace, hackers have the ability to launch an attack from anywhere in the world, without risk of physical injury or capture. When defending a physical location, one only has to protect against intruders from one's "neighborhood." The global nature of the Internet, however, means that everyone is your neighbor, including distinctly insidious neighbors, such as cyber criminals or hostile nation states. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	83 
 
 
 
976. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 227. In theory, the answer is easy: the strong preference should be for a civilian response for what is, after all, a predominantly civilian network. But, the hard truth is that the civilian side of the government lacks the expertise and manpower to effectively do the job - which is why the DHS has announced its plan to hire 1,000 new cyber experts. But, until these new experts are on board (and finding and hiring that many will be a long process), civilian defenses will have to rely on existing expertise that lies predominantly within the NSA. 
977. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE 
NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 265. Our cyber war agenda must include regulation that requires the Tier 1 ISPs to engage in deep-packet inspection for malware and to do so with the highest standards of privacy protection and oversight. The ISPs must be given the legal protection necessary so that they do not have to fear being sued for stopping viruses, worms, DDOS attacks, phishing, and other forms of malware. 
978. James Lewis, (Sr. Fellow, Center for Strategic and International Studies), 
SECURING CYBERSPACE: A NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 113. The call to shrink government and rely on the private sector and markets to address public problems contributes to weak cybersecurity - a government, in the infamous words of Grover Norquist, --small enough to drown in a bathtub‖ is no match for advanced foreign opponents. 
979. James Lewis, (Sr. Fellow, Center for Strategic and International Studies), 
SECURING CYBERSPACE: A NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 113. Governance - the process of creating or amending rules and the mechanisms to secure compliance with them - is cybersecurity's fundamental problem. The original American view was that Internet governance should be weak and the role of government strictly proscribed, as this would empower innovation and allow an emerging global community to guide the new infrastructure. Security was largely ignored. As a result, the Internet has become an unparalleled vehicle for espionage and crime, a true Hobbesian environment. 
980. James Lewis, (Sr. Fellow, Center for Strategic and International Studies), 
SECURING CYBERSPACE: A NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 114. Many countries believe that the U.S. has entrusted management of the Internet to a nonprofit corporation in California, whose behavior has been erratic and whose ties to the U.S. government are murky. They would prefer a management structure directed by states. Those who oppose this solution proffer alternatives that rely on non-state actors, but these alternatives have not worked. 
981. James Comey, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), FEDERAL BUREAU OF 
INVESTIGATION, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, June 11, 2014, 14. We want to predict and prevent attacks, rather than reacting after the fact. FBI agents, analysts, and computer scientists are using technical capabilities and traditional investigative techniques - such as sources and wires, surveillance, and forensics - to fight cyber crime. 
982. David Rothkopf, (Pres., Chicago Council on Global Affairs), NATIONAL 
INSECURITY: AMERICAN LEADERSHIP IN AN AGE OF FEAR, 2014. 337. For all of the questions raised by some of the sweeping programs revealed by Snowden, the surveillance programs of the US government include some targeted efforts that are widely regarded within the intelligence and policy communities as extremely helpful. And new capabilities are emerging daily. Although these will require vigilance to avoid future violations of civil liberties, there is also a sense that on the cyber side, as with drones and the development of light-footprint approaches for combating terror, important steps have been taken that actually enhance the security of the American people and reduce the likelihood of future attacks like those that ushered in this era. 
983. Susan Collins, (U.S. Senator, Maine), SECURING AMERICA'S FUTURE: 
THE CYBERSECURITY ACT OF 2012, Senate Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Feb. 16, 2012, 4. After the 9/11 attacks, we learned of many early warnings that went unheeded, including a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agent, who warned that one day people would die because of the --wall‖ that kept law enforcement and intelligence agencies apart. When a major cyber attack occurs, the ignored warnings will be even more glaring because our Nation's vulnerability has already been demonstrated by the daily attempts by nation states, terrorists groups, cyber criminals, and hackers to penetrate our systems. 
984. Shane Harris, (Fellow, New America Foundation), @WAR: THE RISE OF THE 
MILITARY-INTERNET COMPLEX, 2014, 202. Today most large banks in the United States employ cyber security personnel trained to detect vulnerabilities in software and network configurations, analyze malware to understand how they work and what they're designed to do, and respond to intrusions. Among the main pools of talent for the banks are the US military and intelligence agencies. 
985. Shane Harris, (Fellow, New America Foundation), @WAR: THE RISE OF THE 
MILITARY-INTERNET COMPLEX, 2014, 203. According to experts, the banks have aggressively hired military and intelligence employees who've been trained in government to the highest standards but who can double or even triple their salaries working in the private sector. Banks are also becoming bigger buyers of zero day vulnerabilities and exploits from private security researchers, which have usually counted the NSA as their biggest customer. A security expert with close ties to sellers of zero day exploits says the banks are amassing cyber weapons in the event that they feel compelled to retaliate against the attackers. If a --private‖ cyber war ever breaks out, it will probably be launched by a bank. 
986. Robert Belk, (Fellow, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard U.), 
SECURING CYBERSPACE: A NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 52. In many ways, however, this is a classic case of market failure that deserves government intervention. In many different sectors of the global economy, organizations and corporations who practice poor cybersecurity shift the costs of cyberattacks to others. Although several high-profile and expensive attacks in the last several months may crystallize the potential financial risks of poor cybersecurity, many manufacturers have little incentive to invest additional resources in improving the security of their products. 

987. Lothar Determann, (Prof., Law, U. California's Hastings College of Law). 
HASTINGS CONSTITUTIONAL LAW QUARTERLY, May 2014, 27. Most assume that less government surveillance, intelligence gathering and law enforcement may result in less security. But, less government surveillance, intelligence gathering and law enforcement could also result in a loss of net privacy if one takes into account the fact that surveillance by foreign governments and cybercriminals will increase. Less surveillance does not automatically result in more privacy. Conversely, more surveillance does not automatically guarantee more security - as recent security breaches and data leaks demonstrate. 
988. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 89. The United States has begun a program of using in rem actions to prevent servers from continuing to host botnets used for distributed network attacks. In rem is a legal Latin term that means --against the thing.‖ Most lawsuits are against a person. This less frequent legal action is against a thing, like the servers controlling a botnet. The virtue of an in rem action is that one does not need to know who owns, or controls the thing. You just need to know where the thing itself is. 
989. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 89. This new program was first deployed in April 2011 against the Coreflood botnet. The Coreflood botnet infected more than two million computers around the world. Its operators used the system to steal more than 500 gigabytes of sensitive banking information, resulting in untold financial losses to corporations and individuals. To combat this threat, the federal government used a unique legal tool, filing a civil complaint, authorizing it to have identified Coreflood control servers redirected to networks run by the nonprofit Internet Systems Consortium (ISC). 
990. Lothar Determann, (Prof., Law, U. California's Hastings College of Law). 
HASTINGS CONSTITUTIONAL LAW QUARTERLY, May 2014, 25. Online, we are becoming accustomed to merchants who know us like the village shopkeeper knew our grandparents. Companies create elaborate user profiles to customize searches, services, information, and advertisements. As we engage with these services, expand our online lives, and share personal information in cyberspace, we need protection from fraudsters, hackers, identity thieves, and terrorists. In essence, we need the same security and government protection online as we do offline. 
991. Omer Tene, (Prof., Law, Haim Striks School of Law), COLORADO 
TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL, 2014, 392. The Director of the National Security Agency (NSA) has recently expressed concern that legislative reaction to the Snowden revelations would undermine the nation's cybersecurity defenses. To respond to these perils, governments all over the world have been developing comprehensive programs and systems to boost cyber defenses. By monitoring or imposing requirements to monitor communications data, such programs and systems inexorably affect individuals' privacy. 
992. Danielle Kehl, (Policy Analyst, Open Technology Institute), SURVEILLANCE 
COSTS: THE NSA'S IMPACT ON THE ECONOMY, INTERNET FREEDOM AND CYBERSECURITY, 2014, 31. The NSA employs more than a thousand researchers and experts using a variety of sophisticated techniques to look for bugs. ‗Zero-day' exploits, a term that refers to vulnerabilities that have been discovered but have not yet been disclosed to the public or the vendor, are particularly coveted because it is much harder to protect systems from an attack against an unknown weakness. --Not surprisingly, officials at the N.S.A. and at its military partner, the United States Cyber Command, warned that giving up the capability to exploit undisclosed vulnerabilities would amount to ‗unilateral disarmament,'‖ wrote cybersecurity expert David E. Sanger. According to Sanger, one senior White House official told him, --I can't imagine the president - any president - entirely giving up a technology that might enable him some day to take a covert action that could avoid a 
shooting war.‖ 
993. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 162. Should anyone doubt that there is a true private market in cybersecurity (albeit one with significant externalities), consider the market in zero- day exploits (that is, previously unknown vulnerabilities). Cyber hacker entrepreneurs expend great intellectual capital in discovering these exploits and marketing them on the black market. Truly unique and unusual zero-day exploits can sell for as much as $50,000. There is even a royalty provision in some sales where the discoverer gets a continuing payment for as long as the vulnerability remains unpatched. But perhaps the oddest aspect of the market is this: the market isn't limited to malicious actors. It has been reported that the U.S. government (through the NSA) often buys zero-day exploits from discoverers and may pay over six-figure amounts for the product. 
994. Robert Litt, (General Counsel, Office of the Director of National Intelligence), 
IC ON THE RECORD, Mar. 17, 2014. Retrieved Feb. 8, 2015 from 
http://icontherecord.tumblr.com/post/79998577649/as-prepared-for-delivery-remarks- of- 
odni-general. For example, there have been press reports that NSA has engaged in a concerted effort to break encryption codes. Without commenting on the truth of 
these stories . . . isn't that exactly what intelligence agencies have historically done, 
and what they are supposed to do? We know that our enemies use encryption and 
other techniques precisely to avoid surveillance; NSA's job is to figure out how to 
break those techniques, and its capabilities are unmatched. But saying that NSA can break encryption is different from saying that they routinely spy on encrypted 
conversations of ordinary Americans or foreigners. They don't; all of NSA's 
technical expertise is brought to bear in furtherance of its authorized foreign 
intelligence mission and within the law. [ellipsis in original] 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	84 
 
 
995. Nichol Perlroth, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, Sept. 5, 2013. Retrieved Feb. 13, 	1006. Paul Day, (IT Specialist & White Hat Hacker/Founder, P/H-UK Magazine), 
2015 	from 	http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/06/us/nsa-foils-much-internet-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/06/us/nsa-foils-much-internet-]	CYBER ATTACK: THE TRUTH ABOUT DIGITAL CRIME, CYBER WARFARE 

encryption.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0. The N.S.A., which has specialized in code- 
breaking since its creation in 1952, sees that task as essential to its mission. If it cannot decipher the messages of terrorists, foreign spies and other adversaries, the United States will be at serious risk, agency officials say. Just in recent weeks, the Obama administration has called on the intelligence agencies for details of communications by leaders of Al Qaeda about a terrorist plot and of Syrian officials' messages about the chemical weapons attack outside Damascus. If such communications can be hidden by unbreakable encryption, N.S.A. officials say, the agency cannot do its work. 
996. Bob Goodlatte, (Chair, House Judiciary Comm.), ECPA (PART I): LAWFUL 
ACCESS TO STORED CONTENT, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, Mar. 19, 2013, 4. Pedophiles who sexually assault children and distribute video recordings over the Internet have become increasingly savvy. They encrypt their communications and use technologies to hide their identities and whereabouts. Investigators routinely use court orders under ECPA to identify these offenders, uncover caches of child pornography that has been stored remotely in the cloud, and develop probable cause to execute warrants and arrest them. 
997. David Opderbeck, (Prof., Law, Seton Hall U. Law School), WASHINGTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 2012, 844. Cyberspace is under constant attack. Because real space is increasingly connected to cyberspace, this means that facilities and institutions previously considered national resources - power grids, telephone communication systems, television networks, financial exchanges - are also cyber- resources. Under a system of constitutional democracy, as in the United States, the Executive must have some authority to take emergency actions required to protect such resources in the event of a natural disaster or an attack. This must include the authority to act in the face of a serious cyberattack. 
998. Peter Swire, (Prof., Law, Ohio State U. College of Law), COLUMBIA 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, Spr. 2012, 454. A fundamental problem with cybersecurity today is that the offense is ahead of the defense. "Offense" refers to the hackers who wish to penetrate and disrupt or exploit a cyber system. "Defense" refers the owners and users who wish to protect their cyber systems from intrusion. Cyber attacks have grown rapidly in recent years, increasing in both number and sophistication. These threats are exacerbated by the interconnectedness of the computing environment today. 
999. Theresa Payton, (Former Chief Information Officer at the White House, 2006- 
2008), PRIVACY IN THE AGE OF BIG DATA, 2014, 59. Arthur Coviello Jr., the executive chairman at the security company RSA, opened up the RSA security conference in 2013 with some staggering facts. He said that the world stored a --pettabyte of data in the cloud, which would be the equivalent of 4.9 quadrillion 
books, yet less than 20 percent of that pettabvte of information was protected.‖ 
1000. Abdel Atwan, (Editor-in-chief of Rai al-Youm - An Arab Newspaper), AFTER 
BIN LADEN: AL QAEDA, THE NEXT GENERATION, 2012, 241-242. Intelligence services also use cyberspace to spy to eavesdrop on terrorist groups. In December 2011 Al Qaeda's Global Islamic Forum released a warning regarding a virus: ‗Some brothers - may Allah reward them - reviewed a fake copy of Ansar al- 
Mujahideen Software that included a Trojan file. This file is a surveillance file that 
enables the hacker to view everything on your computer, including encrypted 
messages.' 
1001. Derek Reveron, (Prof., National Security, U.S. Army War College), 
CYBERSPACE AND NATIONAL SECURITY: THREATS, OPPORTUNITIES, AND POWER IN A VIRTUAL WORLD, 2012, 7. There are already many examples of virtual activities impacting the physical world such as terrorists being recruited, radicalized, and trained on the Internet; communications being severed; or power production being disrupted. Illegal groups use cyberspace to move money, conceal identities, and plan operations, which makes it extremely difficult for the governments to compete. Consequently, governments are increasingly concerned 
with the cyber domain as a new feature, within the national security landscape. 
1002. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 223. The Department of Homeland Security has identified 18 sectors of the economy as the nation's critical infrastructure and key resources. As one would expect of a comprehensive list, it covers everything from transportation to the defense industrial base. It also includes energy, financial systems, water, agriculture, and telecommunications. The remarkable thing is that virtually all of the sectors now substantially depend on cyber systems. 
1003. Roland Heickero, (Prof., Swedish National Defense College), THE DARK 
SIDES OF THE INTERNET: ON CYBER THREATS AND INFORMATION WARFARE, 2013, 13. In a 2003 intelligence report on cyber defence by the U.S. Navy the following estimate was done: A group of some thirty hackers, strategically located and with a budget of less than 10 million U.S. dollars, could shut down large 
parts of the critical infrastructure in the United States in a well co-ordinated attack. 
1004. Nirode Mohanty, (Associate Editor, International Journal in 
Telecommunications and Networking), RADICALISM IN ISLAM: RESURGENCE AND RAMIFICATIONS, 2012, 55-56. Nuclear weapons and some military installations may not be physically connected to the territories where terrorists reside, but even with the best computer security, encryption, decryption, and firewalls, computers and the Internet are vulnerable to cybercrimes and hacking. Any battlefield, business, and financial systems, plus traffic control, airport security, power generation and distribution or any other devices that are controlled by computers can be infested with a virus, or undesired, disruptive commands. They are subject to hacking as part of information warfare. Computer networks connected via landlines, satellites, undersea cables, and optic fiber wires can be infiltrated, disintegrated, and subverted, without its being detected. 
1005. Martin Libicki, (Analyst, RAND Corporation), CRISIS AND ESCALATION 
IN CYBERSPACE, 2012, 123. Cyberwar is said to present stability problems similar to those associated with nuclear weapons. Not for nothing did a summer 2010 cover story in the Economist picture cyberwar as the digital equivalent of the nuclear bomb, 
a threat to civilization that necessitated international negotiations and arms control. 
AND GOVERNMENT SNOOPING, 2014, xiii. Cyberwar can cause damage to society far beyond anything that we have ever seen before. If a real cyberwar breaks out - and cyber weapons are deployed - we will no longer have to worry about updating our Facebook or Twitter status. We will be more worried about withdrawing our cash from ATMs, buying food and the lack of electricity and water. 
1007. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 30-31. Indeed, the judgment of the threat by American leaders is harsh, bordering on the extreme. James Clapper, the Director of National Intelligence, testified in January 2012 that state actors in China and Russia were responsible for multiple intrusions into American cyber systems. At the same hearing, FBI director Robert Mueller testified that --threats from cyber-espionage, computer crime, and attacks on critical infrastructure will surpass terrorism as the number one threat facing the United States.‖ With such a pessimistic assessment, it is no wonder that American leaders are preparing for cyber war. 
1008. William Noonan, (Deputy Dir., U.S. Secret Service), DATA SECURITY: 
EXAMINING EFFORTS TO PROTECT AMERICANS' FINANCIAL INFORMATION, House Financial Services Comm. Hearing, Mar. 5, 2014, 8. As a result of our cyber crime investigations, over the past 4 years the Secret Service has arrested nearly 5,000 cyber criminals. In total, these criminals were responsible for over $1 billion in fraud losses, and we estimate our investigations prevented over $11 billion in fraud losses. 
1009. Janet Napolitano, (Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland Security), 
SECURING AMERICA'S FUTURE: THE CYBERSECURITY ACT OF 2012, Senate Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Feb. 16, 2012, 73. To combat cyber crime, DIIS leverages the skills and resources of the U.S. Secret Service, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, and U.S. Customs and Border Protection and works in cooperation with Department ofJustice, especially the Federal Bureau of Investigation, to investigate and prosecute cyber criminals. In FY 2011 alone, DHS prevented $1.5 billion in potential losses through cyber crime investigations and announced charges against 72 individuals for their alleged participation in an international criminal network dedicated to the sexual abuse of children and the creation and dissemination of graphic images and videos of child sexual abuse throughout the world. 
1010. Randy Beers, (Acting Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland Security), 
THREATS TO THE HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 55. Last year, our U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) also resolved approximately 190,000 cyber incidents and issued more than 7,450 alerts - a 68 percent increase from 2011. And our Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS-CERT) responded to 177 incidents while completing 89 site visits and deploying 15 teams to respond to significant private sector cyber incidents. 
1011. Randy Beers, (Acting Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland Security), 
THREATS TO THE HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 55. To combat cyber crime, DHS relies upon the skills and resources of USSS and ICE, and works with a variety of partner organizations and agencies to investigate cyber criminals. Since 2009, DHS has prevented $10 billion in potential losses through cyber crime investigations and 
arrested more than 5,000 individuals for their participation in cyber crime activities. 
1012. Randy Beers, (Acting Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland Security), 
THREATS TO THE HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 12. On July 25th, for example, DOJ announced the indictment of several individuals who directed a prolific criminal cyber hacking organization. USSS [U.S. Secret Service] dismantled this transnational cybercrime ring after the group conspired in a worldwide hacking and data breach scheme that targeted major corporate networks and stole more than 160 million credit card numbers, which resulted in hundreds of millions of dollars in losses - the largest such scheme ever prosecuted in the United States. In Fiscal Year 2013, USSS cyber investigations accounted for over 1,000 arrests globally and prevented over $1.1 billion in fraud loss to U.S. financial institutions. 
1013. Randy Beers, (Acting Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland Security), 
THREATS TO THE HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 55. In 2001, Congress mandated USSS [U.S. Secret Service] to establish a nationwide network of task forces to --prevent, detect and investigate various forms of electronic crimes, including potential terrorist attacks against critical infrastructure and financial payment systems.‖ Currently, USSS hosts 31 Electronic Crimes Task Forces (ECTF) that the Department leverages by combining the resources of academia, the private sector, and Federal, state and local law enforcement agencies. 
1014. Jane Holl Lute, (Deputy Secretary, Dept. of Homeland Security), DHS 
CYBERSECURITY: ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES TO PROTECT THE NATION'S CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Mar. 13, 2013, 14. To combat cyber crime, DHS relies upon the skills and resources of the USSS and ICE and works in cooperation with partner organizations to investigate cyber criminals. Since 2009, DHS has prevented $10 billion in potential losses through cyber crime investigations and arrested more than 5,000 individuals for their participation in cyber crime activities. 
1015. John Dowdy, (Dir., McKenzie & Company), SECURING CYBERSPACE: A 
NEW DOMAIN FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 132. The problem is compounded when cyberattacks are not immediately recognized. We have seen examples of companies that have not discovered attacks until after their systems have been breached for considerable periods of time. The --Kneber bot‖ attack, for example, began in 2008 and was only discovered in 2010, after breaching more than 75,000 computer systems. Operation Shady RAT, revealed by McAfee, involved attacks on more than seventy organizations spanning five years. And some organizations may not be aware of a breach at all. Alperovitch, who authored the McAfee report on Operation Shady RAT, observed that --There are only two types of 
companies - those that know they've been compromised, and those that don't know.‖ 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	85 
 
 
 
1016. Richard Clarke, (Prof., Security Studies, Harvard U.), CYBER WAR: THE NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT, 2012, 260. The reality is that a major cyber attack from another nation is likely to originate in the U.S., so we will not be able to see it coming and block it with the systems we have now or those that are planned. Yes, we may be able to respond in kind, but our nation will still be devastated by a massive cyber attack on civilian infrastructure that smacks down power grids for weeks, halts trains, grounds aircraft, explodes pipelines, and sets fires to refineries. 
1017. Peter Swire, (Prof., Law, Ohio State U. College of Law), COLUMBIA 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, Spr. 2012, 460. In assessing the likelihood of backdoors in the globally standard encryption systems, it is highly significant that no backdoors have been discovered in globally used encryption standards since the 1999 shift in U.S. encryption policy. In our modern Wikileaks world, with so many potential attackers, this lack of discovered backdoors is important evidence that they do not exist. 
1018. Ellen Nakashima, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, Dec. 18, 2013, A1. But 
Tony Sager, a former NSA information assurance executive, said moving the defensive mission out of NSA was unwise. "The defensive mission benefits a lot from the technology and the skills of people who work on the offensive side of the 


1025. Joseph Cassilly, (Past-President, National District Attorneys Association), GEOLOCATIONAL PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE (GPS) ACT, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, May 17, 2012, 30. The GPS Act, as currently written, has been drafted so broadly that the bill would require a search warrant to gather many forms of information that can currently be obtained by subpoena. The new standards set through the GPS Act would hamper law enforcement's ability to quickly obtain important information that could be used to save lives. 
1026. L. Rush Atkinson, (Prof., U.S. Dept. of Justice, Security Division), 
VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW, Oct. 2013, 1234. Since 2001, federal prosecutors have indicted and convicted hundreds of defendants for terrorism, espionage, and other national security crimes. And for every prosecution, there are dozens of investigations into foreign threats that never result in a trial. Between 2001 and 2010, for example, the federal government obtained 16,306 foreign intelligence warrants in the course of its security operations. Between 2004 and 2011, the Federal Bureau of Investigations (--FBI‖) issued 119,192 National Security Letters for records deemed to be pertinent to national security investigations. 
1027. Howard Mintz, (Staff, Mercury News), CONTRA COSTA TIMES, Oct. 8, 
2014. Retrieved Apr. 15, 2015 from Nexis. Government lawyers defend the constitutionality of the letters and insist the gag provisions protect investigations. 

house and vice versa," he said. "They get better insight into the model of what real 
adversaries do." 
1019. Ellen Nakashima, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, Jan. 8, 2014, A2. The panel 
also recommended that the NSA's cyberdefense arm, the Information Assurance Directorate (IAD), be moved out of the agency and under the cyber-policy arm of the Pentagon. The group said the IAD's defensive mission is at odds with the NSA's offensive mission to break into foreign adversaries' networks for intelligence purposes. Panel member Richard A. Clarke, a former White House counterterrorism and cybersecurity adviser, said that creates an "inherent tension" and that the "defensive mission will never be given the priority it needs within an offensive agency." But Richard C. Schaeffer Jr., the IAD's director from 2006 to 2010, called the idea "crazy." "It actually damages the ability to understand the threat," Schaeffer said. "The tactics we employ on the defensive side are based on a deep understanding of how the U.S. exploits other nations' information systems to gain access for 
intelligence purposes. You want the offense and the defense to work together." 
1020. Ellen Nakashima, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, Jan. 8, 2014, A2. Among 
the weapons in the NSA's arsenal are "zero day" exploits, tools that take advantage of previously unknown vulnerabilities in software and hardware to break into a computer system. The panel recommended that U.S. policy aim to block zero-day attacks by having the NSA and other government agencies alert companies to vulnerabilities in their hardware and software. That recommendation has drawn praise from security experts such as Matt Blaze, a University of Pennsylvania computer scientist, who said it would allow software developers and vendors to patch their systems and protect consumers from attacks by others who may try to exploit the same vulnerabilities. "This is not to say that reporting a vulnerability means that NSA can't also exploit it against their targets, only that their overall national security role means that their first responsibility must be to work to fix it," Blaze said. But Schaeffer said: "You're taking a potential weapon away from the very people we're asking to protect the nation. Those people ought to be able to use their best technical professional judgment as to when it's appropriate to alert industry that there's a 
vulnerability." 
1021. Peter Swire, (Prof., Law, Ohio State U. College of Law), COLUMBIA 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, Spr. 2012, 466-467. We are entering a new age in which most individuals carry a tracking device, the mobile phone. Location tracking is a standard feature in a wireless network--the phone company needs to know where your phone is located to route calls to you. Location information is tremendously useful for law enforcement and national security 
agencies. It can put a suspect at the scene of a crime, or establish an alibi. 
1022. Laura Donohue, (Prof., Law, Georgetown U. Law Center), MINNESOTA 
LAW REVIEW, Dec. 2012, 508. As Justice Sotomayor noted, --In cases of electronic or other novel modes of surveillance that do not depend upon a physical invasion on property, the majority opinion's trespassory test may provide little guidance.‖ Biometric collection devices like cameras and video feeds enabled with facial 
recognition technology, or remote iris scanners, involve no physical touching. 
1023. Heidi Boghosian, (Dir., A.J. Muste Memorial Institute & Former Dir., National 
Lawyers Guild), SPYING ON DEMOCRACY: GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE, CORPORATE POWER, AND PUBLIC RESISTANCE, 2013, 238. In 2012 the U.S. Supreme Court ruled on a GPS-related case with far-reaching privacy implications, addressing the question of whether law enforcement can use GPS devices without obtaining a warrant to track individuals suspected of crimes. At the time the court considered the case, the FBI was tracking approximately three thousand GPS devices. The court in United States v. Jones held that police exceeded their legal authority by putting a GPS tracker on the car of a suspected narcotics dealer, monitoring the individual for twenty-eight days, without first obtaining judicial approval and a search warrant. In a much awaited decision, the court voted unanimously that police agencies must obtain search warrants before they can install GPS tracking devices on suspects' vehicles. 
1024. David Cole, (Prof., Law, Georgetown Law Center), SURVEILLANCE, 
COUNTER-TERRORISM AND COMPARATIVE CONSITUTIONALISM, 2014, 96. In 2012, the US Supreme Court (USSCt) issued what could be one of its most important privacy decisions in decades, as it took up one version of this issue - namely, whether police use of a global positioning system (GPS) device to monitor the public movements of a car for a month amounted to a search subject to constitutional constraints. The case of United States v Jones (Jones) generated a surprising unanimous decision concluding that the prohibition on unreasonable searches in the Fourth Amendment to the US Constitution was implicated, but the justices were sharply divided in their reasoning. Some justices looked back to notions of property to find that the police action was a search; others looked forward, warning that technology enables the police to invade privacy in ways unheard of when the Fourth Amendment was adopted. That division of reasoning and outlook is emblematic of the uncertainty that new technology has created for the constitutional law of privacy. 
During Wednesday s hearing, Letter warned that losing the investigative tool would '
"greatly hamstring" the FBI's efforts to protect national security. 
1028. Christopher Wolf, (Partner at Hogan Lovells, Washington, D.C. office and 
director of Hogan Lovells' Privacy and Information Management practice group), CARDOZO ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT LAW JOURNAL, 2014, 821. And you'll see that U.S. government requests totaled approximately 96 per capita and 119 per Internet user for these five companies in 2012. The chart shows that Taiwan, the United Kingdom, Hong Kong, France, Australia, and Germany made significantly more requests of these companies on a per capita basis than the United States, Belgium, Portugal, and Singapore; which made fewer requests. What this tells us, we think, is that the United States on a comparative basis is not unique in the world in its desire for personal information for purposes of either law enforcement or national security; and, in fact, on a per capita basis, appears to make fewer requests than some of our democratic counterparts. 
1029. Ellen Nakashima, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, Jan. 8, 2014, A2. For 
instance, the group urged Congress to amend the law so that national security letters (NSLs) can be issued only upon a finding by a judge that the government has reasonable grounds to believe that the data sought are relevant to an authorized terrorism or intelligence investigation. Currently, NSLs can be issued by senior FBI officials in field offices, and officials warn that changing that would impede the bureau's ability to conduct preliminary investigations. The FBI issues more than 20,000 NSLs a year for data such as phone subscriber information and telephone toll records, as well as banking and credit card records. The data do not include phone- call content, which would require a court-approved warrant. 
1030. Ellen Nakashima, (Staff), WASHINGTON POST, Jan. 8, 2014, A2. One senior 
U.S. official said that FBI reforms in recent years have put NSLs under much greater 
oversight and that they are "an essential national security tool" that enables the collection of certain business records only in cases involving terrorists and spies. Imposing judicial review, which is not required of similar records requests in criminal investigations, "would really slow the bureau's ability to react quickly, early in an investigation," the official said. 
1031. Nicholas Turza, (JD Candidate), NORTH CAROLINA JOURNAL OF LAW 
& TECHNOLOGY, 2014, 358. Despite the public's association of domestic drones 
with law enforcement, drone industry experts express skepticism that drone demand in the public safety sector can offer significant demand for drone manufacturing. In contrast, American farmers could replace American soldiers as the heavy buyers of a domestically manufactured product. If commercial drones had a green light to fly, precision agriculture could command eighty percent of the commercial drone market. Thus the irony of the FAA's lassitude is that agriculture, the area that most needs FAA permission for drones, is the area that least needs regulation because rural use implicates few safety or surveillance concerns. 
1032. Nicholas Turza, (JD Candidate), NORTH CAROLINA JOURNAL OF LAW 
& TECHNOLOGY, 2014, 349. Precision agricultural drones are safer than the 
traditional alternative. Piloted crop dusters are --notoriously dangerous‖ because a pilot's unsteady hand must keep the duster only a few yards above rows upon rows of crops while monotonously flying at 150 mph. In addition, the pilot lands and takes off at airports near populated areas. Crop-dusting drones can use their own farms as 
airports, put no pilot at risk, and use automated systems to keep a steady flight path. 
1032. Nicholas Turza, (JD Candidate), NORTH CAROLINA JOURNAL OF LAW 
& TECHNOLOGY, 2014, 349-350. Additionally, drones offer other benefits in 
addition to cost savings for crop dusting. Academics at the Louisiana State University AgCenter work with surveillance drones equipped with --infrared wave links and electromagnetic reflection‖ to offer farmers an asset similar to satellite feeds, allowing analysis of issues as diverse as the nutrient levels of soybean fields to the location of pests and diseases that endanger rice yields. Dairy farmers' potential drone use indicates that the privacy right most likely to be threatened by a surveillance drone is that of a bucolic heifer straying from the herd. 
1034. Ryan Calo, (Prof., Law, U. Washington School of Law), THE FUTURE OF 
DRONES IN AMERICA: LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PRIVACY CONSIDERATIONS, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, Mar. 20, 2013, 101. The U.S. Customs and Border Patrol use unmanned systems to patrol the U.S.-Mexico border, helping prevent drug smuggling and potential terrorist threats. The UAS monitor areas, which would take agents on the ground days to reach. 
1035. Philip Hiltner, (JD, Wake Forest U.), WAKE FOREST JOURNAL OF LAW & 
POLICY, June 2013, 399. Increased police use of UASs is not, in itself, a bad thing. These machines offer the opportunity for police officers to more safely conduct surveillance and apprehend criminals. Drones can also be used for noncriminal functions, such as searching for missing persons and responding to automobile accidents or chemical spills. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	86 
 
 
 
1036. Chris Schlag, (JD Candidate), UNIVERSITY OF PITTSBURGH JOURNAL OF TECHNOLOGY LAW & POLICY, Spr. 2013, 7-8. Drone surveillance features 
include technologies such as automated object detection, GPS surveillance, gigapixel cameras, and enhanced image resolution. Due to its relative cost effectiveness, drone aerial surveillance has quickly become the most efficient tool for monitoring livestock movements, mapping wildlife habitats, maintaining property security, performing road patrols, and combating piracy, among others. 
1037. Chris Schlag, (JD Candidate), UNIVERSITY OF PITTSBURGH JOURNAL 
OF TECHNOLOGY LAW & POLICY, Spr. 2013, 9. UAVs recently have become a 
popular tool for search and rescue operations, as UAVs can be equipped with optical sensors, infrared cameras, synthetic aperture radars, all weather sensors, cameras, laser radar (LADAR), license plate readers, and GPS devices. UAVs are uniquely capable of penetrating areas that may be too dangerous for a piloted craft or individuals on foot. For this reason, UAVs are ideal for search and rescue operations over the ocean, during extreme atmospheric storms, and in thick wilderness settings. 
1038. Ian Rothfuss, (JD Candidate, George Mason U. School of Law), JOURNAL 
OF LAW, ECONOMICS & POLICY, Spr. 2014, 456. Song's general economic model of surveillance may be applied to analyze domestic drone surveillance. Drones provide a very effective means to accomplish widespread, general, persistent surveillance. The optimal amount of drone surveillance will occur where the marginal social benefit of surveillance equals or exceeds the marginal social cost or disutility of the surveillance. Therefore, the costs and benefits resulting from drone surveillance must be identified and analyzed. As a result of the availability of efficient widespread surveillance, increased domestic drone surveillance will generate utility in the form of increased security from crime and terrorism. 
1039. Jonathan Olivito, (JD Candidate), OHIO STATE LAW JOURNAL, 2013, 693. 
Given that the Supreme Court has never actually stated that the constitutional right to privacy exists, but rather has assumed that it exists for the purpose of disposing of cases, some courts have all but repudiated the right. The D.C. Circuit, for example, has stated that it has --grave doubts as to the existence of a constitutional right to 
privacy in the nondisclosure of personal information.‖ 
1040. Y. Douglas Yang, (JD, Boston U. School of Law), THE BOSTON 
UNIVERSITY PUBLIC INTEREST LAW JOURNAL, Summer 2014, 374. Society should not simply hamstring drone use because of its --fear that rapidly advancing science and technology is making [surveillance] more and more effective.‖ Rather, there should balance a between legitimate government needs and society's privacy interest. 
1041. Michael Toscano, (Pres., Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems 
International), THE FUTURE OF DRONES IN AMERICA: LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PRIVACY CONSIDERATIONS, Senate Judiciary Comm. Hearing, Mar. 20, 2013, 93. I also want to correct the misperception there is no regulation of domestic UAS. The FAA strictly regulates who, where, when, and why unmanned aircraft may be flown. If public entities want to fly UAS, they must obtain a Certificate of Authorization or COA from the FAA. UAS are generally flown within line of sight of the operator, lower than 400 feet, and during daylight hours. It is also currently a violation of FAA regulations to fly a UAS for commercial purposes. 
1042. Nate Vogel, (Legislative Counsel, New York Civil Liberties Union), ALBANY 
GOVERNMENT LAW REVIEW, 2015, 211-212. Like with many other technologies that enable surveillance, there is a lively policy debate going on in the public about unmanned aircraft. The debate surrounding unmanned aircraft has a key feature that makes it attractive for an examination that focuses on legislation. The legislative debate about unmanned aircraft in state legislatures has recently exploded, with legislation introduced in almost every single state in the country in just a few years. Many states have seen more than one piece of legislation introduced. 
1043. Nicholas Turza, (JD Candidate), NORTH CAROLINA JOURNAL OF LAW 
& TECHNOLOGY, 2014, 353. Apparently taken by Justice Brandeis' federalist idea 
of using the various state governments as --laboratories of democracy,‖ Yale Law School's Margot E. Kaminski argues that state-by-state experimentation in private drone legislation can find the optimal legal framework for privately operated drones. 
She --argues that preemption of state drone regulation would be a mistake.‖ 
1044. Robert Heverly, (Prof., Law, Albany Law School), ALBANY 
GOVERNMENT LAW REVIEW, 2015, 57. States have the authority to regulate their own affairs. Authority not provided to the federal government by the Constitution remains with the states. That authority allows states to set restrictions on actions taken on their behalf. So long as state laws and policies are not in conflict with Constitutional guarantees or relevant federal policies, states can restrict or otherwise place limitations on the actions of those who act on their behalf. For our purposes here, a number of states have provided for limited uses or imposed requirements on public uses of drones, especially for law enforcement purposes. These laws do not conflict with any federally recognized rights or laws, and as such, are within the power of the states to enact and enforce. They are matters of local control. Even the requirement that public drone operators have a state issued operator's license, after undergoing required training, is squarely within a state's authority to regulate its own affairs. 
1045. Robert Heverly, (Prof., Law, Albany Law School), ALBANY 
GOVERNMENT LAW REVIEW, 2015, 52-53. Surveillance and privacy concerns also form a core of provisions found in state legislation. These laws may prohibit photography and surveillance on private property without the permission of the property owner, and may also prohibit distribution of photographs and video obtained illegally by drone. The privacy concerns related to drones have attracted significant attention in the literature, and I leave the consideration of those concerns to the established discourse. 


1046. Timothy Takahashi, (Prof., Aerospace Engineering, Arizona State U.), ALBANY GOVERNMENT LAW REVIEW, 2015, 96. Traditionally, actions arising from third party aerial surveillance are litigated under state law. In the famous case of DuPont v. Christopher, the court found that DuPont was the victim of industrial espionage when the Christophers took and delivered aerial photographs of DuPont's new plant to an undisclosed third party. The court disagreed with the Christophers' argument that a tortious act can only be committed in the presence of --a trespass, other illegal conduct, or breach of a confidential relationship.‖ The court ruled in favor of DuPont because the applicable state law recognized --a cause of action for the 
discovery of a trade secret by any --improper means.'‖ 
1047. Ray Carver, (JD Candidate), GEORGIA STATE UNIVERSITY LAW 
REVIEW, Winter 2015, 392. Similar to previous cases heard by the courts, a state 
statute barring UASs from flying in certain areas, carrying weapons, or conducting surveillance does not directly conflict with the federal laws or regulations. Compliance with the state statute would not make compliance with the federal laws impossible because federal law is simply permissive in allowing the UAS flight. 
1048. Robert Heverly, (Prof., Law, Albany Law School), ALBANY 
GOVERNMENT LAW REVIEW, 2015, 33. Contrary to what one may initially think based on the long established role the federal government has played in regulating flight, there is space in the regulatory landscape for meaningful state regulation of drones and drone-related activities. States can legitimately take a variety of actions that may affect drones, drone operators and drone operations directly, and a variety of actions that are likely to be in the states' - and the citizens' - best interests. These same actions may be in the national interest, as well, especially to the extent that states can play the role of --regulatory laboratories‖ within the drone regime. 
1049. Gregory McNeal, (Prof., Law, Pepperdine School of Law), EYES IN THE 
SKY: THE DOMESTIC USE OF UNMANNED AERIAL SYSTEMS, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, May 17, 2013, 31. Another way in which the bill [Preserving Privacy Act of 2013] is a drone killer is in Part G, where the bill requires the destruction of any information collected in violation of the law within 24 hours of the information's collection. Juxtapose that provision against Part E which allows those who have been aggrieved under this new law to sue the violating agency or individual, and even provides for criminal punishment for improper collection activities. Careful readers will immediately note the dilemma: A drone operator could be prosecuted or sued for (1) collecting information in the first place, (2) destroying that information (because she is covering up evidence of a crime as well as discoverable evidence in a lawsuit), and (3) prosecuted for not destroying the information (as required by the law). If I'm a trial lawyer, I love the Catch 22 this provision creates. 
1050. Timothy Takahashi, (Prof., Aerospace Engineering, Arizona State U.), 
ALBANY GOVERNMENT LAW REVIEW, 2015, 100. In order for the Fourth Amendment to apply, the government must actually perform the search in question. The government includes police and other publicly paid professionals as well as private persons acting in an agency relationship with law enforcement. Private security forces that are not deputized do not trigger Fourth Amendment protections. Thus the admissibility of Drone surveillance data in a law-enforcement action turns on whether the information derives from a police operated or police deputized aircraft. If surveillance records are obtained by an independent third-party and then voluntarily or compulsively turned over to law enforcement, courts will not exclude such evidence. 
1051. James Comey, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), FEDERAL BUREAU 
OF INVESTIGATION, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, June 11, 2014, 20. Terrorists and criminals are increasingly adept at exploiting cutting-edge technologies to carry out or to mask their crimes. To counter current and emerging threats, the FBI actively deploys a wide range of technology-based tools, capabilities, and training that enable and enhance intelligence, national security, and law enforcement operations. In addition to developing state-of-the-art tools and techniques, the FBI also focuses on recruiting and hiring individuals who possess specialized skills and experience. These dedicated employees serve as technically trained agents, engineers, computer scientists, digital forensic examiners, electronics technicians, and other specialists. Collectively, these specialists enable lawful electronic surveillance, provide secure communications, decipher encrypted messages, reverse engineer malware, forensically examine digital evidence such as images and audio recordings, and much more. 
1052. Stewart Baker, (Distinguished Fellow, Center for Strategic and International 
Studies), SECURE IDENTIFICATION: THE REAL ID ACT'S MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR DRIVER'S LICENSES AND IDENTIFICATION CARDS, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, Mar. 21, 2012, 59. It shouldn't be necessary to say that we need secure identification documents in the United States. Ten years ago, the 9/11 hijackers exploited the security weaknesses of state DMVs to obtain nearly 30 licenses, many of them by fraud. And twenty years ago, Timothy McVeigh used a fake South Dakota license to rent the truck he filled with fertilizer and fuel oil; South Dakota's license security was so weak that McVeigh made his fake license with a typewriter and a clothes iron. 
1053. Jeffrey Simon, (Prof., Political Science, UCLA), LONE WOLF TERRORISM: 
UNDERSTANDING THE GROWING THREAT, 2013, 194. As promising as CCTV is for preventing lone wolf terrorism, biometrics may hold even greater hope for stripping away the anonymity of the lone wolf. Biometrics are the measurable physiological and behavioral characteristics that can be used to identify people. It is based on the principle that certain characteristics of the human body and certain behavioral patterns are unique to an individual. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	87 
 
 
 
1054. Edward Ramotowski, (Deputy Assistant Secretary, U.S. Department of State), ELEVEN YEARS LATER: PREVENTING TERRORISTS FROM COMING TO AMERICA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Sept. 11, 2012, 31. Under the Biometric Visa Program, before a visa is issued, the visa applicant's fingerprints are screened against two key databases. The first database is the Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) Automated Biometric Identification System (IDENT), which has a watch list containing available fingerprints of terrorists, wanted persons, and immigration law violators, as well as the entire gallery of more than 100 million individuals who have applied for visas, immigration benefits, and admission to the United States under the Visa Waiver Program (VWP), to combat identify fraud. The second database is the Federal Bureau of Investigation's (FBI) Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System (IAFIS), which contains more than 50 million criminal history records. More than 10,000 matches of visa applicants with records on the IDENT watch list are returned to posts every month, normally resulting in visa 
refusals. In 2011, IAFIS returned more than 66,000 criminal arrest records to posts. 
1055. James Comey, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), FEDERAL BUREAU 
OF INVESTIGATION, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, June 11, 2014, 21. The Next Generation Identification program advances the FBI's biometric identification and investigation services, providing new biometric functionality such as facial recognition, improved latent searches, and immediate responses related to the Repository for Individuals of Special Concern, a fingerprint index of wanted persons, sexual offender registry subjects, known or appropriately suspected terrorists, and other persons of special interest. 
1056. Lillie Coney, (Assoc. Dir., Electronic Privacy Information Center), DEBATES 
ON U.S. IMMIGRATION, 2012, 307. The REAL ID Act has injected accountability into the ID process by requiring verification as part of the process, thus weeding out false identity claims. It has improved the quality, security, and authenticity of basic forms of identification. It has left the states' central role intact while achieving a national goal of security where IDs are concerned. It has protected individuals from being victimized by identity theft and fraud, while leaving their privacy and personal confidentiality intact. 
1057. Lillie Coney, (Assoc. Dir., Electronic Privacy Information Center), DEBATES 
ON U.S. IMMIGRATION, 2012, 307. REAL ID is tangibly raising the level of security and authenticity of the most commonly used forms of identification in the United States. The law's requirements will make IDs used in connection with employment, including for employment eligibility verification, less vulnerable to fraud and abuse. All states now verify the Social Security numbers of ID applicants. By 2011, all but two states checked driver's license applicants' legal presence. 
1058. Henry Greeley, (Prof., Law, Stanford U.), UTILIZING DNA TECHNOLOGY 
TO SOLVE COLD CASES ACT OF 2011, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, Apr. 25, 2012, 29. The Offender Database contains the CODIS profiles that Congress has authorized the FBI to collect and include, both from the federal judicial system and from state systems. The boundaries of the CODIS system have changed over the years, but they now include profiles from people whose DNA is authorized by federal or state law to be collected and put into such a database. These may be people convicted of various crimes - at this point, all felonies and some misdemeanors - or people arrested for felonies, or non-U.S. nationals detained under federal government authority. All the profiles must include the CODIS markers and states submitting profiles to CODIS have to meet various requirements. As of February 2012, the Offender Database in the National DNA Index in CODIS contained over 10,560,300 profiles. The FBI reported that the database had assisted over 166,700 prosecutions during its existence. This assistance had been provided when a profile determined from crime scene DNA had been checked against the CODIS Offender Database and a match had been found. 
1059. Colin McFerrin, (JD Candidate, Texas Wesleyan School of Law), TEXAS 
WESLEYAN LAW REVIEW, Spr. 2013, 973. The cases of the --Bind, Torture, Kill‖ (--BTK‖) serial killer and the --Grim Sleeper‖ killer are two prolific examples of law enforcement and prosecutors using DNA evidence to identify - and eventually convict - suspects. In both cases, however, law enforcement identified their suspects using familial searching. In familial searching, law enforcement examines criminal DNA databases in an effort to identify the suspect, or a close relative of the suspect, by comparing the DNA profile of known offenders-arrestees with genetic evidence recovered from a crime scene. Familial searching recognizes the concept that individuals in a sibling or parent-child relationship share more genetic material with each other than with non-familial individuals due to the DNA replication process discussed above. 
1060. Colin McFerrin, (JD Candidate, Texas Wesleyan School of Law), TEXAS 
WESLEYAN LAW REVIEW, Spr. 2013, 974. Dennis Rader, the self-named BTK criminal, murdered ten people between the 1970s and 1990s and managed to elude police for over thirty years in spite of his sending taunting letters and word puzzles to police and media. Police suspected Rader after he sent a computer disk containing an electronic imprint to a local Wichita, Kansas television station. Police were unable to confirm Rader's identity by comparing DNA evidence left at several BTK crime scenes to a sample of Rader's DNA. Instead, so as not to alert Rader that police suspected his involvement, investigators compared crime scene DNA to genetic information belonging to Rader's daughter. Armed with a court order and without the daughter's knowledge or consent, police obtained her Pap smear tissue sample from a Kansas medical clinic. The comparison between crime scene DNA and the daughter's DNA profile demonstrated that she was the daughter of the BTK killer, resulting in Dennis Rader's February 2005 arrest. 
1061. Sylvia Longmire, (Former U.S. Air Force Officer & Intelligence Analyst), 
BORDER INSECURITY: WHY BIG MONEY, FENCES, AND DRONES AREN'T MAKING US SAFER, 2014, 71. Known most commonly by the acronym ALPR for Automatic License Plate Reader/Recognition, the units have been in use across the United States for some time. They're used to fine drivers who blow through toll booths without paying, find kidnappers in --Amber Alert‖ situations, and track down stolen vehicles. They can also be used to find drivers with suspended licenses, no insurance, or multiple unpaid parking tickets. In some places, like New York, the volume of traffic is so high that the readers don't check every plate against a full database in real-time. Instead, the readers match scans up against a --hot list‖ of plates belonging to people who have committed a crime or violation. The hot list can contain any set of plate data, from terrorist watch lists, to stolen vehicles, to parking scofflaws. 


1062. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 120. Before the development of this technology, drivers running red lights were identified only infrequently when they had the bad luck to run the light in the presence of a police officer. Now, with automated cameras, the rate of capturing wrongful red light runs is higher. The same is increasingly true of a host of other offenses. Given the rate and scope of technological development, the trend will only continue. This change - the use of technology to make it more likely (if not certain) that violations of law will be observed - will work powerful effects on the deterrence component of law enforcement and, if properly applied, on criminal and espionage type activities in cyberspace. We now calculate the optimal level of punishment by discounting the real punishment to account for the likelihood of getting caught. A 10-year sentence with a 1-in-10 chance of capture arguably has an effective deterrent value of one year in prison. When the chance of capture increases, the effective deterrent does as well. 
1063. Newton Lee, (Former Staff Member, Institute for Defense Analysis), 
FACEBOOK NATION: TOTAL INFORMATION AWARENESS, 2013, 179. A Long Island, New York study found that serious crimes dropped 47% after CCTV surveillance systems were installed by businesses and homeowners in 1993. There were 8,000 burglaries in 1994 compared to about 15,000 in 1975, and there were also fewer robberies in 1994 than in 1975. 
1064. Newton Lee, (Former Staff Member, Institute for Defense Analysis), 
FACEBOOK NATION: TOTAL INFORMATION AWARENESS, 2013, 179. Researchers from UC Berkeley's Center for Information Technology Research in the Interest of Society studied the crime-deterrent effects of the San Francisco Community Safety Camera Program between January 2005 and January 2008. They found a statistically significant 22% decline in property crime occurring within 100 feet of camera locations, but no statistically significant changes in crime beyond 100 feet from the site. 
1065. Newton Lee, (Former Staff Member, Institute for Defense Analysis), 
FACEBOOK NATION: TOTAL INFORMATION AWARENESS, 2013, 201. Around the world, public closed-circuit television (CCTV) systems help deter crimes in shopping malls, convenience stores, gas stations, parking garages, airports, banks, casinos, and other public places. Although the proliferation of CCTV cameras has created some unease about the erosion of civil liberties and individual human rights, the majority of people have accepted the presence of CCTV in public places. 
1066. Bennett Capers (Prof., Law, Brooklyn Law School). FORDHAM URBAN 
LAW JOURNAL, Mar. 2013, 984-990. Although cameras are not a cure-all, they can certainly make a difference in apprehending criminals. As I have already mentioned, we saw this possibility play out with the quick apprehension of Faisal Shahzad in connection with his plot to detonate explosives in Times Square. Now multiply that by thousands. Every day, police are able to identify and apprehend law offenders through the use of surveillance footage. Indeed, the day that I began writing this Article, a seventy-three-year-old woman was raped, beaten, and robbed in Central Park. Within twenty-four hours, the suspect, a drifter from Virginia, was in custody, thanks largely to video surveillance images of the suspect. 
1067. Bennett Capers (Prof., Law, Brooklyn Law School). FORDHAM URBAN 
LAW JOURNAL, Mar. 2013, 960. This Article also urges that we listen to communities. For many communities, public surveillance not only deters crime and aids in the apprehension of criminals; it can also function to monitor the police, reduce racial profiling, curb police brutality, and ultimately increase perceptions of legitimacy. 
1068. Christopher Calabrese, (Legislative Counsel, American Civil Liberties Union), 
EYES IN THE SKY: THE DOMESTIC USE OF UNMANNED AERIAL SYSTEMS, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, May 17, 2013, 47. One point that is often made about new surveillance technologies is that, while they may increase government surveillance of individuals, they can also increase individuals' ability to record the activities of officials, which can serve as a check on their power. Too often, however, the authorities seek to increase their surveillance over individuals (for example, by installing surveillance cameras throughout public spaces) while restricting individuals' ability to use that same technology as a check against their power (for example, by attempting to prevent individuals from videotaping police). 
1069. Betty Sapp, (Dir., U.S. National Reconnaissance Office), HEARING ON 
NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2014, House Armed Services Comm. Hearing, Apr. 25, 2013, 3. Despite our fiscal challenges, the NRO is committed to sustaining the support most critical for our warfighters worldwide. In addition to traditional NRO ISR [Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance] capabilities, we provide a wide array of systems and capabilities integral to the highest-priority missions, including identifying, locating, and tracking high-value targets, special communications support, and counter-IED [Improvised Explosive Device] efforts. 
1070. Bennett Capers (Prof., Law, Brooklyn Law School). FORDHAM URBAN 
LAW JOURNAL, Mar. 2013, 978-979. The potential benefits of surveillance cameras become apparent when we consider two aspects of policing that I have written about previously: racial profiling and police brutality. Consider racial profiling. As I have argued before, here the numbers are the issue. Recent numbers from New York City's stop-and-frisk initiative are particularly revealing. In New York, African Americans and Hispanics constitute over 80% of the individuals stopped, a percentage far greater than their representation in the population. Moreover, of the African Americans stopped, 95% were not engaged in activity warranting arrest. When considered as a percentage of the population, the numbers are even more jarring. Stops of whites, if spread across the population of New York City, would amount to stops of approximately 2.6% of the white population during the period. By contrast, stops of blacks, if spread across the population, would amount to stops of approximately 21.1% of the population. Moreover, a significant number of these stops have been found to be unjustified, prompting a class action lawsuit against the New York City Police Department. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	88 
 
 
 
1071. Jeanne Ireland, (Assistant Commissioner, U.S. Food and Drug Administration), LIMITLESS SURVEILLANCE AT THE FDA: PROTECTING THE RIGHTS OF FEDERAL WHISTLE-BLOWERS, House Oversight and Government Reform Comm. Hearing, Feb. 26, 2014, 193. For example, upon logging on to the FDA network, users immediately receive the following warning message: You ore accessing a U.S. Government information system, which includes (I) this computer, (2) this computer network, (3) all computers connected to this network, and (4) all devices and storage media attached to this network or to a computer on this network. This information system is provided for U.S. Government-authorized use only. Unauthorized or improper use of this system may result in disciplinary action, as well as civil and criminal penalties. By using this information, you understand and consent to the following: You have no reasonable expectation of privacy regarding any communications or data transiting or stored on this information system. At any time, and for any lawful government purpose, the government may monitor, intercept, and search and seize any communication or data transiting or stored on this information system. 
1072. Walter Harris, (Commissioner for Oversight, U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration), LIMITLESS SURVEILLANCE AT THE FDA: PROTECTING THE RIGHTS OF FEDERAL WHISTLE-BLOWERS, House Oversight and Government Reform Comm. Hearing, Feb. 26, 2014, 34. Because, as described above, FDA personnel are subject to monitoring of their use of Agency IT systems, resources, and equipment, Agency personnel are regularly advised that they have no reasonable expectation of privacy when making use of the FDA computer network, and that any use of Agency IT resources, including e-mail, may be monitored. Such notice is provided to FDA personnel by variety of means. 
1073. Jeanne Ireland, (Assistant Commissioner, U.S. Food and Drug Administration), 
LIMITLESS SURVEILLANCE AT THE FDA: PROTECTING THE RIGHTS OF FEDERAL WHISTLE-BLOWERS, House Oversight and Government Reform Comm. Hearing, Feb. 26, 2014, 193. FDA is not aware of any information that suggests that Agency personnel collected passwords for individuals' personal e-mail accounts, According to the forensic engineer principally involved in the computer monitoring, to the extent individuals' passwords may have been captured, it would have been incidental to the objective of the monitoring and FDA did not utilize or otherwise take any action related to such passwords. 
1074. Jeanne Ireland, (Assistant Commissioner, U.S. Food and Drug Administration), 
LIMITLESS SURVEILLANCE AT THE FDA: PROTECTING THE RIGHTS OF FEDERAL WHISTLE-BLOWERS, House Oversight and Government Reform Comm. Hearing, Feb. 26, 2014, 191. The question of the authorization of monitoring is being addressed in the OSC investigation you and Senator Grassley have requested, as well as the pending litigation, and the Agency is still identifying and gathering evidence with respect to these issues. We can assure you, however, that the Agency did not monitor these individuals' use of nongovernment-owned computers. To the extent an individual elected to use a government computer to engage in correspondence using a personal e-mail account, data derived from such use were collected in the same manner as were data derived from other uses of the government-issued computer. 
1075. Jeanne Ireland, (Assistant Commissioner, U.S. Food and Drug Administration), 
LIMITLESS SURVEILLANCE AT THE FDA: PROTECTING THE RIGHTS OF FEDERAL WHISTLE-BLOWERS, House Oversight and Government Reform Comm. Hearing, Feb. 26, 2014, 194. FDA initiated monitoring of the government- owned computers of the five individuals identified above for two principal purposes: 1) to identify the source of the unauthorized disclosures, if possible; and 2) to identify any further such unauthorized disclosures so as to better enable FDA to facilitate their cessation. 
1076. Jeanne Ireland, (Assistant Commissioner, U.S. Food and Drug Administration), 
LIMITLESS SURVEILLANCE AT THE FDA: PROTECTING THE RIGHTS OF FEDERAL WHISTLE-BLOWERS, House Oversight and Government Reform Comm. Hearing, Feb. 26, 2014, 194. The impetus for the monitoring was not any communication to Congress. Rather, the impetus for monitoring was the March 2010 Times article and the receipt of the GE Healthcare letter just prior to the initiation of monitoring, which indicated that the preceding pattern of similar unauthorized disclosures of confidential information from other pending medical device applications and submissions was continuing unabated. It should also be noted that, in conducting the computer monitoring, data were collected without regard to the identity of the individuals with whom the user may have been corresponding. 
1077. Walter Harris, (Commissioner for Oversight, U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration), LIMITLESS SURVEILLANCE AT THE FDA: PROTECTING THE RIGHTS OF FEDERAL WHISTLE-BLOWERS, House Oversight and Government Reform Comm. Hearing, Feb. 26, 2014, 43. In accordance with Federal law, and in order to ensure that FDA can effectively carry out its mission, the Agency must be vigilant to protect against the misuse or unauthorized disclosure of the confidential information that is regularly entrusted to it. FDA believes that the policies and procedures that HHS and the Agency have put in place appropriately and effectively balance the individual interests of employees and the critical need to safeguard the security and integrity of the data and information systems that FDA has been entrusted to manage. 
1078. Report of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, 
LIMITLESS SURVEILLANCE AT THE FDA: PROTECTING THE RIGHTS OF FEDERAL WHISTLE-BLOWERS, House Oversight and Government Reform Comm. Hearing, Feb. 26, 2014, 126. The Whistleblower Protection Act provides protections for whistleblowers against personnel actions taken because of a protected disclosure made by a covered employee. The Act provides that --any disclosure of information‖ made by a covered employee who --reasonably believes‖ evidences --a violation of any law, rule, or regulation‖ or evidences --gross mismanagement, a gross waste of funds, an abuse of authority, or a substantial and specific danger to public health or safety‖ so long as the disclosure is not prohibited by law nor required to be kept secret by Executive Order. 


1079. Adam Wallwork, (JD, U. of Chicago Law School), SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, Fall 2013, 3. After 9/11, the U.S. government greatly enhanced its efforts to disrupt the flow of terrorist funds. Executive Order ("E.O.") 13224 (September 23, 2001) broadened the authority of the Department of the Treasury ("Treasury") to freeze (block) terrorist assets, including property belonging to U.S.-based terrorist supporters. Pursuant to E.O. 13224, the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control ("OFAC") has blocked tens of millions of dollars in assets belonging to U.S. persons (citizens, resident aliens, and entities organized under U.S. law), preventing them from using or transferring their assets without OFAC's consent. 
1080. Malick Ghachem, (Prof., History, MIT), FIRST AMENDMENT LAW 
REVIEW, Fall 2013, 156. The body of law known as material support of terrorism is a mix of (civil) administrative and criminal enforcement strategies that together produce a more powerful set of counterterrorism tools than criminal law alone could provide. 
1081. Malick Ghachem, (Prof., History, MIT), FIRST AMENDMENT LAW 
REVIEW, Fall 2013, 147. The crackdown on Muslim charities has been a key front, if not the single most important front, of the financial war on terror. And the practice of zakat (mandatory charitable giving) is one of the five pillars of Islam, the Muslim variation on the Abrahamic theme of tithing shared by Christians, Jews, and other religious groups. 
1082. Adam Wallwork, (JD, U. of Chicago Law School), SOUTHERN 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, Fall 2013, 3. Combating terrorist financing is an essential element of United States and global counterterrorism efforts. International terrorist networks require funds to support their infrastructures. It takes money to recruit and train terrorists, procure weapons and safe-houses, pay for travel, support families of so-called "martyrs," issue propaganda, and provide social services to win local support. Even small sums can be used to fund devastating attacks. 
1083. Sam Adelsberg, (JD Candidate), HARVARD NATIONAL SECURITY 
JOURNAL, 2013, 289-290. A review of the cases also indicates that the material support statute is usually used to target support provided to a limited group of recipients: organizations that the United States has unambiguously and publicly designated as terrorist organizations. Of the material support prosecutions brought between September 2001 and July 2007, for example, roughly one-third involved alleged material support provided to al-Qaeda. In a substantial proportion of the remaining prosecutions, the foreign terrorist organization involved was either Hamas or FARC. 
1084. Malick Ghachem, (Prof., History, MIT), FIRST AMENDMENT LAW 
REVIEW, Fall 2013, 163. To date, only one Muslim American charity has been convicted of material support of terrorism (HLF); IARA closed down before it could be brought to trial, and the charges against BIF were dismissed by a federal district judge. 
1085. Malick Ghachem, (Prof., History, MIT), FIRST AMENDMENT LAW 
REVIEW, Fall 2013, 161. The fungibility of money permits a designated organization to use money given for peaceful ends towards a terrorist objective, or simply to free up other funds that can be used to support terrorism. Coordinated political advocacy on behalf of an FTO, for its part, could facilitate the work of terrorism by raising the profile of the organization internationally and drawing additional support in the form of new recruits and funds. 
1086. Lee Hammel, (Staff), MASSACHUSETTS TELEGRAM & GAZETTE, June 
1, 2012, B1. Although Judge Saylor said the government never showed that money 
raised by Care International, including $130,000 sent to an organization co-founded by Osama bin Laden, was spent on material support for fighting - such as guns or ammunition - the prosecutor said the money spent for the fighters is "fungible"- it frees other money for fighting and he called on the judge to "at least acknowledge" the harm done. If private organizations with their own agendas are not deterred from lying about their real purpose "then you're opening up the floodgates to creating more bin Ladens," Mr. [Aloke] Chakravarty [a federal prosecutor] said. "Without real deterrence," he said, those fighting terrorism "will turn to some other means with less 
oversight." 
1087. Malick Ghachem, (Prof., History, MIT), FIRST AMENDMENT LAW 
REVIEW, Fall 2013, 150. The real driving force in the Muslim charity cases becomes the merger of First Amendment doctrine with the principle of fungibility, an economic term that, in this context, describes the ability of a designated terrorist organization to convert (innocent charitable) money into other, illegal uses. As Judge Alex Kozinski of the Ninth Circuit put it in 2002, "money is fungible; giving support intended to aid an organization's peaceful activities frees up resources that can be used for terrorist acts." By this standard, there can be no distinction between a charity's legitimate and illegitimate activities, no matter how isolated the latter may be. 
1088. Malick Ghachem, (Prof., History, MIT), FIRST AMENDMENT LAW 
REVIEW, Fall 2013, 156. The wartime Muslim charity cases are not likely to be repeated in anything like their past configuration, and protection of "civilian" religious liberty in contemporary America remains essentially robust - for Muslims as for followers of other faiths. 
1089. Adam Wallwork, (JD, U. of Chicago Law School), SOUTHERN 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, Fall 2013, 43-44. Equally, terrorist-financing presents imminent dangers that make warrants impracticable. To effectively combat terrorist financing, OFAC must be able to freeze terrorist-related assets before funds can move into terrorists' hands. Government officials should not be forced to wait for judicial approval before taking action against U.S. persons to stop the flow of terrorist-linked funds. Provided U.S. counterterrorism seizures are based on probable cause of terrorist financing, they are reasonable in the constitutional sense. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	89 
 
 
1090. INVESTOR'S BUSINESS DAILY, Feb. 24, 2014, A10. Treasonous as it 
sounds, the president is following through on a little-noticed overture he made to 
Muslims in his Cairo speech of 2009, when he suggested he'd relax enforcement of material support laws involving "zakat," or Islamic charitable giving. He basically apologized for the Bush administration's locking up the founders of the largest Muslim charity in America for sending millions to "zakat committees" linked to Hamas. Of course, his move weakens, yet again, America's security. By exempting five kinds of limited material support for terrorism, Obama instantly purges more than 4,000 suspects from the U.S. terror watch list and opens our borders up to both them and their families. 
1091. Lauren Blanchard, (Specialist in African Affairs, Congressional Research 
Service), FROM AL-SHABAAB TO AL-NUSRA: HOW WESTERNERS JOINING TERROR GROUPS OVERSEAS AFFECT THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Oct. 9, 2013, 13. U.S. policymakers have been concerned for years with al-Shabaab recruitment abroad for two main reasons. First, such recruitment has led to the participation of U.S. citizens in al-Shabaab terrorist activities overseas. Second, and salient to today's hearing, the group has recruited Americans or individuals carrying passports from countries in the Visa Waiver Program, including countries in Europe, who might potentially seek to target the United States. 
1092. Michael McCaul, (Chair, House Committee on Homeland Security), FROM 
AL-SHABAAB TO AL-NUSRA: HOW WESTERNERS JOINING TERROR GROUPS OVERSEAS AFFECT THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Oct. 9, 2013, 2. More than a hundred Americans are fighting overseas supporting terrorism, from the Middle East and Syria, or to Africa and Somalia. Individuals in our own communities are being recruited by organizations like al-Shabaab. These individuals directly undermine our homeland security. They have been recruited inside the United States, have left and could potentially return, presenting a vast vulnerability in our counterterrorism efforts. Overseas, while fighting and supporting terrorists, they receive military training, combat experience, and grow their jihadist network. Coming back with these skills and connections extends a spider web of extremism into our own backyards. 
1093. Paul Sperry, (Former Washington Bureau Chief), INVESTOR'S BUSINESS 
DAILY, Feb. 20, 2015, A15. The U.S. will admit as many as 2,000 Syrian nationals by the end of fiscal year 2015, up from 525 since fiscal 2011. Yes, the number of displaced people inside war-torn Syria and Iraq, an estimated 3 million refugees, rivals the most in Mideast history. But throwing out the welcome mat for them in the middle of a mushrooming war on Muslim terrorism is dangerously shortsighted. Top U.S. counterterror officials say terrorists could easily slip into the country from Iraq and Syria, in spite of promised screening procedures for such refugees. 
1094. Ginger Adams, (Staff), NEW YORK DAILY NEWS, Apr. 21, 2015, 16. Six 
men from Minnesota who tried to get to Syria to join Islamic State extremists have 
been arrested and charged with terrorism, the FBI said Monday. Three of them were initially stopped in New York City, where they planned to use Kennedy Airport as their gateway to the jihadi life, the criminal complaint said. All six were friends in Minnesota and had plotted together to join ISIS fighters overseas, according to the feds. They are U.S. citizens of Somali descent, authorities said. 
1095. James Comey, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), THREATS TO THE 
HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 60. As the Boston bombings this past April illustrate, the terrorist threat against the United States remains very real. We face a continuing threat from homegrown extremists, especially those who act alone or in small cells. Homegrown Violent Extremists (HVEs) present unique challenges because they do not share a typical profile, and their experiences and motives are often distinct, which makes them difficult to identify and their plots difficult to disrupt. 
1096. Beau Barnes, (JD Candidate, Boston U. School of Law), BOSTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, Oct. 2012, 1647-1648. Homegrown terrorism has been on the rise since the September 11 attacks, but in recent years a new threat has emerged: the lone wolf terrorist. Whereas the typical homegrown terrorist operates in coordination with a small number of extremists whose continued intra-group 
communication facilitates the radicalization process, lone wolves are solitary. 
1097. Report of the House Committee on Homeland Security, COMPILATION OF 
HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 152. In late 2010, Attorney General Eric Holder said there had been 126 homegrown plots, threats, and attacks since 2009 - the year homegrown radicalized jihadis attacked military heroes at Fort Hood and in Little Rock. Since we began our investigation into the radicalization threat from within the Muslim-American community, many more violent Islamist extremists have been intercepted attempting to kill their fellow Americans. 
1098. Report of the House Committee on Homeland Security, COMPILATION OF 
HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 152. Homegrown radicalization is now the vanguard of al-Qaeda's strategy to continue attacking the United States and its allies. The evidence comes from core al-Qaeda's tapes released from Pakistan, its Yemen affiliate's on-line Inspire home-grown terror how-to publication created by two American jihadis, and from Somalia's al-Qaeda affiliate al-Shabaab Mujahideen, who released a tape last fall by a suicide bomber from Minneapolis who urged: --My brothers and sisters, do jihad in America . . . anywhere you find [infidels], fight them 
and be firm against them.‖ [ellipsis in original] 


1099. Report of the House Committee on Homeland Security, COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 152. Each investigative hearing by the committee's Majority uncovered significant findings that illuminated an uncomfortable reality: Radicalization inside the Muslim-American community has often been ignored by many of that community's leaders, who have not always reported suspicious activity and have even obstructed law enforcement. In cities such as San Diego and Minneapolis, some imams participated in or facilitated recruiting and fundraising inside mosques. Facts collected by the committee from open and classified Government briefings, terror experts and confidential sources, and from witnesses called to testify by the Majority - including four former senior law enforcement officials, four Muslim community activists, three relatives of terrorists or terror victims, two senior administration officials and one former Special Operations commander who is a terrorism expert - offer Congress, the Executive 
Branch, and the public irrefutable proof of the extent of the radicalization threat. 
1100. Report of the House Committee on Homeland Security, COMPILATION OF 
HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 155. Despite the fact that homegrown violent Islamist extremism is a threat that has rapidly arisen since 2009 - the year of the Fort Hood and Little Rock attacks on soldiers by radicalized Muslim Americans - many leaders refuse to fully acknowledge this problem or just how extensive this threat remains. 
1101. Matthew Olsen, (Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), THREATS TO THE 
HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 70. Homegrown Violent Extremists (HVEs) remain the most likely global jihadist threat to the Homeland. While the threat posed by HVEs probably will broaden through at least 2015, the overall level of HVE activity is likely to remain the same: a handful of uncoordinated and unsophisticated plots emanating from a pool of up to a few hundred individuals. Lone actors or insular groups who act autonomously pose the most serious HVE threat. 
1102. Matthew Olsen, (Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), THREATS TO THE 
HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 70. The Boston Marathon bombing in April underscores the threat from HVEs [Homegrown Violent Extremists] who are motivated, often with little or no warning, to act violently by themselves or in small groups. In the months prior to the attack, the Boston Marathon bombers exhibited few behaviors that law enforcement and intelligence officers traditionally use to detect commitment to violence. We are concerned that HVEs could view lone offender attacks as a model for future plots in the United States and overseas. The perceived success of previous lone offender attacks combined with al-Qaeda and AQAP's propaganda promoting individual acts of terrorism is raising the profile of this tactic. 
1103. Matthew Olsen, (Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), THREATS TO THE 
HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 71. HVEs [Homegrown Violent Extremists] make use of a diverse online environment that is dynamic, evolving, and self-sustaining. This online extremist environment is likely to play a critical role in the foreseeable future in radicalizing and mobilizing HVEs towards violence. Despite the removal of important terrorist leaders during the last several years, the online environment continues to reinforce an extremist identity, supplies grievances, and provide FIVEs the means to connect with terrorist groups overseas. 
1104. Matthew Olsen, (Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), THREATS TO THE 
HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 71. Looking ahead, we assess HVEs [Homegrown Violent Extremists] probably will continue gravitating to simpler plots that do not require advanced skills, communication with others, or outside training. We assess HVEs probably will move towards more active shooter events such as Nidal Hassan's attack at Ft. Hood, the recent Navy Yard shooting, or Anders Breivik's mass shooting at a political youth camp in Norway. HVEs stress targeting military personnel, bases, facilities, recruiting stations, and places where military personnel gather. 
1105. Al Franken, (U.S. Senator, Minnesota), ST. PAUL PIONEER PRESS, Sept. 3, 
2014. Retrieved Apr. 25, 2015 from Nexis. "As you know, one aspect of that threat is ISIL's efforts to recruit American and other Western citizens to join its forces. One American who went to high school in Minnesota has been confirmed to have been killed in Syria while fighting with ISIL, and others have traveled there to fight with ISIL as well. We must act diligently and responsibly to prevent Americans from 
taking up arms with ISIL, or from reentering our country if they do." 
1106. Jonathan White, (Prof. & Dir., Homeland Security Project, Grand Valley State 
U.), TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY, 2014, 446. Brian Jenkins found that forty-six publically recorded attacks or attempted attacks came from homegrown jihadist terrorists between September 11, 2001, and December 2009. Far from having been recruited by a nefarious network of hidden operatives, most of the people involved in the cases were self-radicalized; and, they sought to join the jihad on their own. 
1107. Jonathan White, (Prof. & Dir., Homeland Security Project, Grand Valley State 
U.), TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY, 2014, 589. The United States has created a blind spot. By focusing on operations overseas and failing to account for the complexity of evolving jihadist organizations, the unthinkable has happened. Hoffman says that the jihadists have created bases of operations in the United States. He points to ten jihadist plots or terrorist attacks in America during 2009. Although some of the culprits were incompetent, activities in 2009 represented an unprecedented level of attempts. In addition, the planned attack on Christmas Day 2009 would have been the deadliest incident since 9/11. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	90 
 
 
 
1108. Heritage Foundation, US OFFICIAL NEWS, Apr. 21, 2015. Retrieved Apr. 20, 2015 from Nexis. Now, twenty years after the Oklahoma City bombing, the threat of homegrown terrorism is still alive and well. U.S. security and intelligence officials just foiled three terrorist plots in the course of three weeks. While this stands as a testament to how much intelligence capabilities have improved since 1995, the frequency of attempts also demonstrates the seriousness of the threat. The arrest of John T. Booker on April 10 marked the 66th Islamist terrorist plot against the U.S. homeland since 9/11, with at least 55 of those plots being homegrown. ISIS and al- Qaeda continue to motivate and facilitate homegrown terrorism, and global dependence on cyberspace provides a new arena in which malicious actors can target 
U.S. interests. 
1109. Matthew Olsen, (Dir., National Counterterrorism Center), THREATS TO THE 
HOMELAND, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 71. To better detect and disrupt an attack, we continue to refine and improve our counterterrorism data layer and our analysts' access to intelligence from across the community. These accesses, leveraged by our skilled and diverse interagency workforce, and combined with our sophisticated analytic tools, are absolutely necessary in developing our best all-source, collaborative terrorism analysis. 
1110. Bennie Thompson, (U.S. Rep., Mississippi), ASSESSING THE THREAT TO 
THE HOMELAND FROM AL-QAEDA OPERATIONS IN IRAN AND SYRIA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearings, May 22, 2013, 8. The Boston Police Chief testified that there is no need to live in a surveillance state and a former FBI special agent in charge testified that community involvement is what is necessary to recognize the signs of radicalization and prevent attacks. 
1111. INVESTOR'S BUSINESS DAILY, Jan. 20, 2015, A19. With Belgian, German 
and French police all busting up Islamic State terror cells, some in deadly shootouts, 
attention is turning to the U.S. At least a dozen IS sleeper terrorists are secreted here. Yet the FBI still hasn't kicked down any doors. Apparently the bureau is still "tracking them," as the FBI director says, which is not comforting given the FBI's track record for losing the terrorists it monitors. 
1112. Jonathan White, (Prof. & Dir., Homeland Security Project, Grand Valley State 
U.), TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY, 2014, 442-443. Emerson followed the PBS broadcast with the book American Jihad, which documents his charges. Both efforts found a network of terrorist cells, false charities, and training camps in the United States. Emerson points to an international jihadist network in the United States that emerged after the 9/11 attacks, but he says that there were many indications of activity long before September 2001. 
1113. Brad Kickerbocker, (Staff), CHRISTIAN SCIENCE MONITOR, Feb. 22, 
2015. Retrieved Apr. 12, 2015 from Nexis. "Washington fears the group," notes a Council on Foreign Relations (CFR) report, particularly because it "has successfully recruited members of the Somali-American diaspora" in order to "orchestrate strikes on US soil." Dozens of people from the Minneapolis-St. Paul area, many of them Somali-Americans, have traveled or attempted to travel overseas to support groups such as Islamic State or Al Shabab since 2007, according to prosecutors. "I'm very concerned about the serious potential threat of independent actors here in the United States. We've seen this now in Europe. We've seen this in Canada," [U.S. Assistant Secretary of Homeland Security, Jeh] Johnson said. 
1114. Patrick Meehan, (Chair, House Subcommittee on Counterterrorism and 
Intelligence), TERRORIST FINANCING SINCE 9/11: ASSESSING AN EVOLVING AL-QAEDA AND STATE SPONSORS OF TERRORISM, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 18, 2012, 2. The terrorist enemies we now face are more diverse, diffuse, and decentralized than ever. Al-Qaeda and their affiliates have concluded that, to bring America down, they will attack with, --smaller but more frequent operations,‖ what some may refer to as the strategy of a thousand cuts. The aim is to bleed the enemy, meaning us, to death. 
1115. Samuel Rascoff, (Prof., Law, NYU School of Law), NEW YORK 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, June 2014, 854. As Cato Institute Research Fellow Julian Sanchez observed: One possible motive for these elaborate and highly publicized stings is that, whether or not the particular people they indict would have moved from rage to action without prompting, the steady stream of news reports will eventually force any candidate for jihad to assume that an --Al Qaeda recruiter‖ who approaches them is much more likely to be an FBI informant or undercover agent than a genuine operative. That's likely to make it much harder for any real recruiters who've gone undetected to rope in anyone savvy enough to be truly dangerous. 
1116. Samuel Rascoff, (Prof., Law, NYU School of Law), NEW YORK 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, June 2014, 854-855. An open question - an answer to which requires more empirical data - is whether the government's prosecution of relatively amateur would-be terrorists based on stings is likely to be effective in deterring better-trained terrorists. But it bears remembering that the viability of the deterrence-based account of stings does not depend on who is prosecuted. The mere fact of prosecution can alter terrorists' perceptions of future success by implying a pervasive surveillance network facilitated by technology. 
1117. Samuel Rascoff, (Prof., Law, NYU School of Law), NEW YORK 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, June 2014, 857-858. Unlike traditional deterrence, which conveys its message through fear of being caught and punished, new deterrence relies on a wider and subtler range of official modalities that go to the likelihood of terrorist success. For example, the government may aim to demoralize an adversary by telegraphing the state's overwhelming might. The state might do so by --spreading false or exaggerated rumors of the existence of sting operations,‖ sowing a sense of distrust within a cell by implying that one among them is on an official payroll, or even conveying an image of officials as irrational and prone to unmeasured violence. 


1118. Mary Sanchez, (Staff), DURHAM HERALD-SUN, Oct. 28, 2014, A11. The three Denver-area teenagers also signal a new reality. And it's one that has been 
building for years, darkly aided by the Internet. In September, a Denver 19-year-old 
woman pleaded guilty to providing material support to al-Qaida and the Islamic State. 
She also had been heading to Syria to marry a man she met online who said he was fighting with terrorists. American cities with large East African immigrant communities have also seen their share of young men being recruited to join Islamic extremists. The FBI has responded. Agents have been trying to establish connections with Somali and Sudanese immigrant leaders, and Muslim communities in general, in the hope that they will alert the agency to such recruiting. 
1119. Beau Barnes, (JD Candidate, Boston U. School of Law), BOSTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, Oct. 2012, 1635. Confidential informants are a frequent source of information leading to the disruption of terrorist plots and the subsequent arrest and prosecution of terrorist suspects. The precise sequence with which law enforcement uses confidential informants varies. Sometimes an individual from within a terrorist group changes his mind and comes voluntarily to the police, or an informant is placed after police receive a tip from the public. Other confidential informants are recruited after they themselves are arrested, and their cooperation with police results in dropped charges or favorable sentencing. Still other informants come from law enforcement itself and are used in "sting" operations when would-be terrorists seek to acquire weapons. Regardless of the specific process, "the information available indicates [that] intelligence gathered through the use of informants, and from tips received from members of the public . . . appears to be the most effective counterterrorism tool for breaking up domestic plots." [ellipsis in 
original] 
1120. Michael Schmidt, (Staff), NEW YORK TIMES, Mar. 26, 2015, A12. In 2015, 
however, the F.B.I. faces an increasingly complicated and dangerous global threat 
environment that will demand an accelerated commitment to reform. Everything is moving faster. The principal authors of the report were Bruce Hoffman, a professor of security studies at Georgetown University; Edwin Meese III, the former attorney general; and Timothy J. Roemer, a former House member from Indiana and former ambassador to India. The report said that to improve its intelligence gathering and analysis, the F.B.I. needed to have more informants. 
1121. Daniel Gerstein, (Deputy Under Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security), TSA'S SPOT PROGRAM AND INITIAL LESSONS FROM THE LAX SHOOTING, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 27. First, the SPOT program is part of a layered security system and must be considered in that context. It does not exist in isolation and therefore must be considered in terms of its incremental contribution to improving the overall probability of detection of persons that knowingly and intentionally attempt to defeat the security process. Relying on any single process, technology, or capability is not an acceptable strategy. This layered security system consists of several opportunities to screen passengers and verify travel documentation. Checks are done when a passenger purchases a ticket and obtains a boarding pass. 
1122. Daniel Gerstein, (Deputy Under Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security), TSA'S SPOT PROGRAM AND INITIAL LESSONS FROM THE LAX SHOOTING, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2013, 27. Second, the underlying concepts employed within the SPOT program are based on scientific research and represent the best practices from defense, intelligence, and law enforcement organizations. These practices have become accepted based on years of experience in these fields in attempting to identify persons that should receive additional scrutiny in a screening process. What the SPOT process does - that has not been previously done - is to methodically identify and assess a broad range of behavioral characteristics and provide a scoring system that adds a structure to the intuitive and highly subjective processes that many have relied on in the past. 
1123. Nathan Sales, (Prof., Law, George Mason U.), PRIVACY AND 
SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 127-128. Consider Zacarias Moussaoui, the convicted 9/11 conspirator and al Qaeda operative. Moussaoui evidently stored incriminating data on his laptop computer, including information about crop-dusting aircraft and wind patterns. If investigators had found this data on Moussaoui's laptop when he arrived in the United States, it's possible they might have begun to unravel his ties to al Qaeda. More recently, in 2006, a laptop search at Minneapolis-St. Paul airport helped U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers detect a potentially risky traveler. Once he was referred to secondary inspection, CBP discovered that he had a manual on how to make improvised explosive devices, or IEDs - a weapon of choice for terrorists in Afghanistan and Iraq. Inspecting the passenger's computer, officers also found video clips of IEDs being used to kill soldiers and destroy vehicles, as well as a video on martyrdom. 
1124. Jayson Ahern, (Former Commissioner, U.S. Customs and Border Patrol), 
PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 153. In addition to several successes in arresting individuals possessing child pornography, CBP border searches also have been helpful in limiting the movement of terrorists, individuals who support their activities and threats to national security. During border searches of laptops CBP officers have found violent jihadist material, information about cyanide and nuclear material, video clips of Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) being exploded, pictures of various high-level Al-Qaida officials and other material associated with people seeking to do harm to the U.S. and its citizens. 
1125. Stewart Baker, (Former Assistant Dir. for Policy, Dept. of Homeland Security), 
PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 147. In 2006, for example, border officials at the Minneapolis-St. Paul airport referred a suspect traveler to secondary inspection. There they found that his computer contained video clips of IEDs being used to kill soldiers and destroy vehicles and a video on martyrdom. He was also carrying a manual on how to make improvised explosive devices, or IEDs - a weapon of choice for terrorists in Afghanistan and Iraq. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	91 
 
 
 
1126. Nathan Sales, (Prof., Law, George Mason U.), PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 128. Terrorism is not the only threat laptop searches can detect. Inspections of international travelers' computers also have proven instrumental in the government's efforts to combat child pornography and even ghastlier forms of child exploitation. In fact, there have been eleven federal decisions examining the scope of CBP's authority to search laptops at the border, and every single one has involved child pornography. 
1127. Nathan Sales, (Prof., Law, George Mason U.), PRIVACY AND 
SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 134. I don't anticipate that the Court will be persuaded by efforts to liken laptop computers to homes. The reason the home has enjoyed uniquely robust privacy protections in the Anglo-American legal tradition is because it is a sanctuary into which the owner can withdraw from the government's watchful eye. --[A] man's house is his castle,‖ and --The poorest man may in his cottage bid defiance to all the forces of the Crown.‖ Crossing an international border is in many ways the opposite of this kind of withdrawal. Rather than concealing oneself from the government, one is voluntarily presenting oneself to the government for inspection and permission to enter the country. 
1128. Stewart Baker, (Former Assistant Dir. for Policy, Dept. of Homeland Security), 
PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 146. Laptops are treated like books and papers. They are searched whenever border officials think that such a search is likely to be productive. And even the famously liberal ninth Circuit, the court of appeal that includes California, has had no trouble approving that practice. For good reason. Laptop searches pay off. 
1129. Stewart Baker, (Former Assistant Dir. for Policy, Dept. of Homeland Security), 
PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 146-147. After 9/11, we used laptop searches to find possible terrorists. That's in part because investigators famously failed to inspect the laptop of one of the 9/11 conspirators, Zacarias Moussaoui, when it might have done some good. Found early enough, the information on his laptop might have helped uncover Moussaoui's ties to al Qaeda. Having learned that lesson, we began using laptop searches more often when terrorism was a risk. 
1130. Nathan Sales, (Prof., Law, George Mason U.), PRIVACY AND 
SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 136. It must be stressed that CBP should not reveal too much about the factors it uses to select passengers for laptop searches. Doing so could provide terrorists, child pornographers, and other criminals with a roadmap for avoiding detection. 
1131. Stewart Baker, (Former Assistant Dir. for Policy, Dept. of Homeland Security), 
PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 145. The government has always had the right to search anything crossing the border without probable cause. Smugglers are smart and highly motivated; they would find a way to exploit any limitations on the authority to conduct searches. 
1132. Jayson Ahern, (Former Commissioner, U.S. Customs and Border Patrol), 
PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 158-159. It is important to understand that CBP typically encounters well over a million travelers every day and is responsible for enforcing over 600 federal laws at the border. CBP does not have the resources to conduct searches on every laptop or cell phone that pass through our ports of entry, nor is there a need to do so. When we do conduct a search, it is often premised on facts, circumstances, and inferences which give rise to individualized suspicion, even though the courts have repeatedly confirmed that such individualized suspicion is not required under the law. 
1133. Stewart Baker, (Former Assistant Dir. for Policy, Dept. of Homeland Security), 
PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 148. Everyone at the border is busy; there's another jet or another bus arriving in minutes. Border officers don't have the luxury of hooking up the laptops of random travelers for inspection without a good reason. Officers who waste their time and DHS's resources that way are going to hear from their supervisors long before they hear from the travelers' lawyers. 
1134. John Sanders, (Assistant Administrator, Transportation Security 
Administration), TSA'S RECENT SCANNER SHUFFLE: REAL STRATEGY OR WASTEFUL SMOKESCREEN?, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Nov. 15, 2012, 7-8. TSA works with the private industry to develop and deploy the best 


1136. Rebekka Murphy, (JD Candidate, U. California at Berkeley School of Law), HASTINGS CONSTITUTIONAL LAW QUARTERLY, Summer 2012, 944. The TSA conducts searches with AIT for the purpose of expediently discerning airline security threats among volumes of people. An accurate assessment of guilt in this context likely prevents airplane hijacking and the losses that accompany it, as well as aids in the prosecution of attempted hijackers. As medical intrusion cases indicate, the community interest will be met if the searches detect security risks, and it would be difficult for the agency to otherwise accomplish its purpose. AIT's strength lies in its ability to detect risks such as metallic and non-metallic explosives concealed on the body. 
1137. Omer Tene, (Prof., Law, Haim Striks School of Law), COLORADO 
TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL, 2014, 415. If passengers were required to parade naked under the gaze of a TSA officer, they would no doubt experience an invasion of privacy. The scan is therefore structured both technologically and operationally to avert any direct interaction between an officer and an undressed human body. Tirosh and Birnhack explain: Technologically, the scanners blur faces, and now use only a generic outline of a human body. Operationally, the agent reviewing the image sits in a remote location and does not see the passenger. . . . Discursively, the language that is applied to describe scanning presents it as an automatic, anonymized, universal, neutral, routine, and professional process. In short, the officer is blind to the human body under scrutiny and instead focuses only on any illicit material carried by the 
passenger. [ellipsis in original] 
1138. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Washington U.), CYBER WARFARE: 
HOW CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE ARE CHALLENGING AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 2013, 110. The Department of Homeland Security operates a sophisticated data analysis program called the Automated Targeting System (ATS) to assess the comparative risks of arriving passengers. Based on those assessments, the inspection resources of Customs and Border Protection (CBP) are allocated. The system is essential, given the sheer volume of travelers to America. In a typical year, approximately 350 million people sought entry across our borders, and more than 85 million of those arrived by air. Since more than 350 million individuals cannot, obviously, be subject to intense scrutiny, some form of assessment and analysis must be used to make choices about how and when to conduct inspections. ATS is that system. 
1139. John Pistole, (Administrator, TSA), TSA'S EFFORTS TO FIX ITS POOR 
CUSTOMER SERVICE REPUTATION AND BECOME A LEANER, SMARTER AGENCY, House Homeland Security Comm. Hrg., June 7, 2012, 8-9. A dedicated TSA workforce assures the traveling public that they are protected by a multi-layered system of transportation security that mitigates risk. An effective workforce must be properly trained and good management is a key ingredient in preserving a motivated and skilled workforce. TSA's new training office has implemented several new initiatives to accomplish this objective. 
1140. John Pistole, (Administrator, TSA), TSA'S EFFORTS TO FIX ITS POOR 
CUSTOMER SERVICE REPUTATION AND BECOME A LEANER, SMARTER AGENCY, House Homeland Security Comm. Hrg., June 7, 2012, 10. TSA strives to provide the highest level of security while ensuring that all passengers are treated with dignity and respect. The agency works regularly with a broad coalition of disability and medical condition advocacy groups to help understand their needs and adapt screening procedures accordingly. All travelers may ask to speak to a TSA supervisor if questions about screening procedures arise while at the security checkpoint. 
1141. Colby Alonso, (Spokesperson, Association of Flight Attendants), 
CHALLENGING THE STATUS QUO AT TSA: PERSPECTIVES ON THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION SECURITY, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, July 10, 2012, 29. AFA opposes any measures that would require the TSA administrator to allow more privatization. There are many advantages to a Federalized screening workforce. Federalized airport screening has been a success and has improved the security of air travel. A Federalized workforce provides stability throughout our Nation's airports by providing a multi-layered aviation security system from the time a passenger buys a ticket to the time a passenger exits the airport. 
1142. John Gage, (President, American Federation of Government Employees), John 
Pistole, (Administrator, TSA), SCREENING PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM: WHY IS 

technology available to detect metallic and nonmetallic threats, such as the explosive 	A	JOB-CREATING, 	PUBLIC-PRIVATE 	PARTNERSHIP 	MEETING 

devices used by the underwear bomber on Christmas day 2009 and the improved 
device discovered in the disrupted plot this past May. These are threats that walk- through metal detectors cannot detect. TSA currently operates a mix of millimeter wave and general-use backscatter MT units at 200 airports. All of the millimeter wave AIT units have been upgraded with automatic target recognition functionality, and testing is under way for ATR in general-use backscatter machines. 
1135. John Sanders, (Assistant Administrator, Transportation Security 
Administration), TSA'S RECENT SCANNER SHUFFLE: REAL STRATEGY OR WASTEFUL SMOKESCREEN?, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Nov. 15, 2012, 8. TSA places a premium on passenger safety with respect to MT. Both types of MT have been repeatedly evaluated and determined to meet all applicable National health and safety standards. These tests have demonstrated that the radiation from a TSA general-use backscatter MT screening is well below established safety limits for individuals being screened, operators, and bystanders, including children, pregnant women, frequent flyers, and individuals with medical implants. In fact, the average person receives more radiation naturally each hour than they do from one screening by a general-use backscatter X-ray MT system, and receives the same amount of X-ray exposure from 2 minutes of flight at altitude on the aircraft they are boarding. General-use backscatter X-ray MT systems undergo a radiation survey upon initial installation and every 6 months thereafter to ensure it stays in top working condition. The surveys and periodic maintenance activities ensure the equipment operates properly and meets all emission limits. 
RESISTANCE AT TSA?, House Homeland Security Comm. Hrg., Feb. 16, 2012, 41. Aviation security is too important to be left to the private sector. I know the free- market advocates will recoil when I say that, but as we have seen over and over since 9/11, the terrorists will never quit trying to attack us. Private contractors must by their very nature keep their eyes on the bottom line. That consideration cannot help but bleed over into decisions on staffing, training, recruitment, retention, and operations. As a frequent flyer myself -- and I know the Members of this committee are as well --  it seems beyond question to me that we should want the Federal Government to continue to provide the focus, the consistency, and the stability that this mission requires. If we learned nothing else from 9/11, I would hope we learned that. 
1143. Kelly Hogan, (Assistant Administrator, TSA), TSA OVERSIGHT: 
EXAMINING THE SCREENING PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM, House Government Reform Hearing, Jan. 14, 2014, 12. The SPP [Screening Partnership Program] is a voluntary program whereby airports may apply for SPP status and employ private security companies to conduct airport screening according to TSA standards. Participation depends on interest from airport operators. To date, that interest has been limited. Since the creation of the program in 2004, 30 airports have applied to the program (including the original 5 pilot airports) and 14 airports have private contract screeners in place. Of those 14 airports, seven fall within the smallest airport classification (Category IV - which means they emplane between 2,500 and 10,000 passengers a year). The 14 airports currently participating in SPP represent 
approximately 1,849 or 3.9% of the passenger screening positions across the country. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	92 
 
 
1144. John Gage, (President, American Federation of Government Employees), John 	1151. Sylvia Longmire, (Former U.S. Air Force Officer & Intelligence Analyst), 
Pistole, (Administrator, TSA), SCREENING PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM: WHY IS 	BORDER INSECURITY: WHY BIG MONEY, FENCES, AND DRONES AREN'T 
A	JOB-CREATING, 	PUBLIC-PRIVATE 	PARTNERSHIP 	MEETING 	MAKING US SAFER, 2014, 124. As for Hezbollah members entering the United 

RESISTANCE AT TSA?, House Homeland Security Comm. Hrg., Feb. 16, 2012, 41. 
The drumbeat to privatize security screening operations runs contrary to laws enacted by Congress in recent years requiring Government agencies to in-source functions that are inherently Governmental. Recent efforts to reform procurement practices at Government agencies and reduce their over-reliance on private contracting also argue against privatizing TSA's screening work. 
1145. Bennie Thompson, (U.S. Representative, Mississippi), SCREENING 
PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM: WHY IS A JOB-CREATING, PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP MEETING RESISTANCE AT TSA?, House Homeland Security Comm. Hrg., Feb. 16, 2012, 5. Under the Republican suggestion, the only thing that will change is whether the jobs will be public or private. We know that both types of screeners are effective and face challenges, follow the same rules, and receive the same training. We also know that private screeners cost up to 9 percent more than Federal screeners. We know that public and private screeners can join unions. So the only real difference is cost. What we want to know is why the Republicans seem to be willing to pay more for the same service and how doing so will create jobs. 
1146. Gerald Connolly, (U.S. Representative, Virginia), TSA OVERSIGHT: 
EXAMINING THE SCREENING PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM, House Government Reform Hearing, Jan. 14, 2014, 5. Proponents of the expanding the SPP program assert that private screeners improve efficiency and reduce costs compared to federal screeners. However, TSA's cost estimates have found the opposite concluding that private screening costs are generally between three to nine percent higher than federal screening. 
1147. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Mason U.), STATE OF FEDERAL 
PRIVACY AND DATA SECURITY LAW: LAGGING BEHIND THE TIMES?, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2012, 107. The story of Ra'ed al-Banna, a Jordanian who attempted to enter the U.S. at O'Hare Airport on June 14, 2003, illustrates the value of computer dataveillance. al- Banna was carrying a valid business visa in his Jordanian passport and, on the surface, appeared to be an unremarkable business traveler from the Middle East. The Department of Homeland Security operates a sophisticated data analysis program called the Automated Targeting System (ATS) to assess the comparative risks of arriving passengers. Based on those assessments, the inspection resources of Customs and Border Protection (CBP) are allocated. The system is essential given the sheer volume of travelers to America. In a typical year approximately three hundred and fifty million people sought entry across our borders, and more than eighty-five million of those arrived by air. Since over three hundred and fifty million individuals cannot, obviously, be subject to intense scrutiny, some form of assessment and analysis must be used to make choices about how and when to conduct inspections. ATS is that system. ATS flagged al-Banna for heightened scrutiny. His pattern of travel and his prior record of entry to the U.S. combined to suggest that he should be subjected to secondary screening - a form of enhanced, individualized review where a passenger is pulled from the main line of entrants and individually questioned. During the secondary interview, al-Banna's answers were inconsistent and evasive - so much so that the CBP officer who conducted the interview decided to deny his application for entry and ordered him returned to his point of origin. As a matter of routine, al-Banna's photograph and fingerprints were collected before he was sent on his way. There the story might have ended, since CBP officers reject entry applications daily for a host of reasons, but al-Banna proved an unusual case. More than a year later, in February 2005, a car filled with explosives drove into a crowd of military and police recruits in the town of Hillah, Iraq!' More than one hundred twenty-five people died - the largest death toll for a single incident in Iraq until that time. The suicide bomber's hand and forearm were found chained to the steering wheel of the exploded car (why they were chained is a fascinating question of psychology). When the fingerprints were taken by U.S. military forces, a match was found to the fingerprints taken from al-Banna twenty months earlier in Chicago. 
1148. Kelli Walther, (Deputy Assistant Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security), ELEVEN YEARS LATER: PREVENTING TERRORISTS FROM COMING TO AMERICA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Sept. 11, 2012, 13. In November 2010, DHS achieved a major aviation security milestone by assuming responsibility from the airlines for terrorist watch list screening for 100 percent of aircraft operators covered by the Secure Flight Final Rule for flights into, out of, and within the United States. This year, DHS expanded the program to include overflights (i.e., flights that pass over but do not land in the United States) by requiring all Foreign Air Carriers to report Secure Flight passenger data for covered flights. Transportation Security Administration (TSA) continues to work with foreign air carriers to ensure compliance of this requirement. In addition to facilitating secure travel for all passengers, Secure Flight helps prevent the misidentification of passengers who have names similar to individuals on Government data sets. 
1149. Kelli Walther, (Deputy Assistant Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security), ELEVEN YEARS LATER: PREVENTING TERRORISTS FROM COMING TO AMERICA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Sept. 11, 2012, 13. Secure Flight screens more than 14 million passenger reservations against terrorist information each week. Approximately 25 individuals per month are denied boarding under the Secure Flight program. 
1150. Kelli Walther, (Deputy Assistant Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security), ELEVEN YEARS LATER: PREVENTING TERRORISTS FROM COMING TO AMERICA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Sept. 11, 2012, 15. With all of these efforts, DHS is deliberate in its effort to give travelers an opportunity to be heard when an issue arises. The Department has established the DHS Traveler Redress Inquiry Program (DHS TRIP), a single point of contact for individuals, regardless of citizenship, who have inquiries or seek resolution of difficulties they experience during travel, including: Denied or delayed airline boarding; denied or delayed entry into and/or exit from the United States; or frequent referral for additional screening. Individuals who complete the redress process are 
issued a redress number that can be used to book travel to prevent misidentifications. 
States through Mexico, few people dispute this. Mahmoud Youssef Kourani --was a 
member, fighter, recruiter, and fundraiser for Hezbollah,‖ according to a criminal complaint filed in November 2003. It said, --Operating at first from Lebanon and later the United States, Kourani was a dedicated member of Hezbollah who received specialized training in radical Shiite fundamentalism, weaponry, spy-craft, and counterintelligence in Lebanon and Iran . . . Among other duties, Kourani held the 
position of fundraising solicitor for Hezbollah.‖ [ellipsis in original] 
1152. Stephen Caldwell, (Dir., Maritime and Security Issues, U.S. Government 
Accountability Office), WHAT DOES A SECURE MARITIME BORDER LOOK LIKE?, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Nov. 19, 2013, 20. Along the coasts and in ports, maritime surveillance, interdiction, and operations are conducted to ensure the security of the maritime borders. For example, CBP's Office of Air and Marine is to provide maritime surveillance and interdiction capabilities. 
1153. Janet Napolitano, (Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland Security), 
HOMELAND THREATS AND AGENCY RESPONSES, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee Hearing, Sept. 19, 2012, 55. These aerial assets supplement the CBP Office of Air and Marine aerial assets and support the Border Patrol's ability to operate in diverse environments, expand our field of vision in places with challenging terrain, and help us establish a greater visible presence from a distance, which increases deterrence. And this year, CBP introduced an extremely effective new aviation surveillance technology to monitor the border. The U.S. Army has loaned CBP a new electronic sensor system. CBP flies Predator B unmanned aircraft systems (UASs) with this new system on the Southwest border. This system provides DHS with the first broad area, electronic sensor system, with capabilities that far exceed those of the ground based fixed or mobile systems. 
1154. Jessica Vaughn, (Dir., Policy Studies, Center for Immigration Studies), 
DEBATES ON U.S. IMMIGRATION, 2012, 324. The clearest evidence of how workplace enforcement helps U.S. workers came after some of the highly visible workplace raids of the late 2000s. In the last quarter of 2006, several large meatpacking plants in the Midwest lost about 1,700 workers, or 23 percent of their workforce, over the course of several months, following the implementation of stricter verification of worker authorization and raids by immigration agents. All the facilities returned to full production within a few months, and the illegal workers were replaced with U.S. citizens and legal immigrant workers who were recruited with increased wages, bonuses, and better transportation options. This resulted in a negligible, if any, impact on consumer prices, as labor accounts for only a tiny share of consumer costs in the meat industry. 
1155. Trista Chaney, (Counsel, Federation for American Immigration Reform), 
DEBATES ON U.S. IMMIGRATION, 2012, 205. In October 2006, the Majority Staff Report of the House Committee on Homeland Security stated, --Not all illegal aliens are crossing into the United States to find work. Law enforcement officials indicate that there are individuals coming across the border who are forced to leave their home countries because of criminal activities. These dangerous criminals are 
fleeing the law in other countries and seeking refuge in the United States.‖ 
1156. Trista Chaney, (Counsel, Federation for American Immigration Reform), 
DEBATES ON U.S. IMMIGRATION, 2012, 207. According to the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration and National Drug Intelligence Center report, the increase in drug-trafficking activity in North Carolina during the period from 1990 to 2000 was directly related to a record influx of foreign nationals into the state. In 2005, the House Committee on Homeland Security reported that 1.1 to 2.2 million kilograms of cocaine and 5.8 to 11.6 kilograms of marijuana were smuggled into the United States at the Mexican border. In the words of the committee, Mexican drug cartels have effectively taken control of the U.S.-Mexico border and --operate with military grade weapons, technology and intelligence and their own respective paramilitary enforcers.‖ These Mexican drug trafficking cartels --represent the greatest organized crime threat to the United States‖ according to a threat assessment report by the National Drug Intelligence Center. 
1157. Donna Bucella, (Assistant Commissioner, U.S. Customs and Border 
Protection), BORDER SECURITY THREATS TO THE HOMELAND: DHS' RESPONSE TO INNOVATIVE TACTICS AND TECHNIQUES, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, June 19, 2012, 11. Vast expanses of remote and rugged terrain between our ports of entry (POEs), coupled with the large volumes of trade and traffic at our POEs, are targeted for exploitation by smugglers and other cross- border criminal organizations. Smugglers use a wide range of ever-evolving methods to attempt to move their illicit goods into the United States both at and between our POEs, including the subterranean movement of contraband by way of tunnels. Smugglers move people, weapons, cash, narcotics and other contraband, which are concealed on people, in vehicles, in cargo, and on aircraft and marine vessels. On a typical day, CBP seizes more than 6,200 kilograms (13,700 pounds) of drugs and nearly $350,000 in undeclared or illicit currency. The Southwest Border is the primary entry point for cocaine, heroin, marijuana, and methamphetamine entering the United States. 
1158. Julie Wood, (Former Assistant Secretary, U.S. Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement), DEBATES ON U.S. IMMIGRATION, 2012, 199. Driver's licenses are a de facto national identity card for obtaining a job, opening a bank account, and accessing the vast majority of governmental institutions and critical infrastructure facilities. To allow the issuance of state driver's licenses or identity cards to persons who are present in the United States in violation of law would undermine numerous federal programs as well as diminish many national security-related programs that have been implemented since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. 
1159. James Comey, (Dir., Federal Bureau of Investigation), FEDERAL BUREAU 
OF INVESTIGATION, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, June 11, 2014, 15. The federal government protects 7,000 miles of U.S. land border and 95,000 miles of shoreline. Every day, more than a million visitors enter the country through one of 327 official ports of entry along the Mexican and Canadian borders, as well as through seaports and international airports. Any corruption at the border enables a wide range of illegal activities, potentially placing the entire nation at risk by letting drugs, guns, money, and weapons of mass destruction slip into the country, along with criminals, terrorists, and spies. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	93 
 
 
 
1160. Peter Swire, (Prof., Law, Ohio State U.), PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES, 2012, 124. Today, border searches help protect against foreign invasion, criminals, and terrorists. They help keep contraband such as drugs and weapons out of the country, and they ensure that our national immigration system works according to law. 
1161. Andrew Linenberg, (Attorney, Lawrenceville, NJ), DEBATES ON U.S. 
IMMIGRATION, 2012, 66. One reason for this conclusion is that as the number of Border Patrol agents doubled between 2007 and 2009 and a substantial portion of fencing was added along the U.S.-Mexico border, the number of unauthorized immigrants decreased by about one-third. During the same time frame, the number of unauthorized immigrants returning home more than doubled (compared to return migration between 2000 and 2009). In fact, enforcement efforts contributed to a decline in the number of unauthorized immigrants even before the rise in the rate of unemployment in this population. 
1162. Alan Simpson, (Former U.S. Senator, Wyoming), NEW YORK TIMES, Mar. 
18, 2015, A25. If people working in the shadows come forward to an employer using E-Verify because they know they will clear a criminal-background check, and begin paying taxes honestly, in their own names, legalizing them and their families - one at a time, in a steady, manageable flow - is the right thing to do. It's certainly a price well worth paying to stop future illegal immigration cold, through tough eligibility screening and border enforcement. 
1163. Janet Napolitano, (Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland Security), 
HOMELAND THREATS AND AGENCY RESPONSES, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee Hearing, Sept. 19, 2012, 55. The results of these comprehensive and coordinated efforts have been significant. Border Patrol apprehensions - a key indicator of illegal immigration - have decreased 53 percent in the last three years and have decreased 80 percent from what they were at their peak. Indeed, illegal immigration attempts have not been this low since 1971. Violent crime in U.S. border communities has also remained flat or fallen over the past decade according to FBI Uniform Crime Report data, and statistics have shown that some of the safest communities in America are along the border. From FYs 2009 to 2011, DI- IS seized 74 percent more currency, 41 percent more drugs. and 159 percent more weapons along the Southwest border as compared to FYs 2006 to 2008. 
1164. Michael Fisher, (Chief, U.S. Border Patrol), MEASURING OUTCOMES TO 
UNDERSTAND THE STATE OF BORDER SECURITY, House Comm. on Homeland Security Hearing, Mar. 20, 2013, 9. The implementation of the Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative (WHTI) involved a substantial technology investment in the land border environment - this investment continues to provide both facilitation and security benefits. For example, today, more than 19 million individuals have obtained Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) technology-enabled secure travel documents. These documents are more secure as they can be verified electronically in real time back to the issuing authority, to establish identity and citizenship; they also reduce the average vehicle processing time by 20 percent. 
1165. Michael McCaul, (Chair, House Comm. on Homeland Security), A NEW 
PERSPECTIVE ON THREATS TO THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Feb. 13, 2013, 5. The administration must work to incorporate existing technology such as Department of Defense Sensor Surveillance equipment used in Iraq and Afghanistan in order to gain comprehensive visibility of the border landscape. Using proven, effective technologies to enhance our border security efforts will save taxpayer dollars and make our citizens safer. 
1166. John Woods, (Assistant Dir., Immigrations and Customs Enforcement, U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security), ELEVEN YEARS LATER: PREVENTING TERRORISTS FROM COMING TO AMERICA, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Sept. 11, 2012, 25. The Visa Security Program (VSP) interdicts criminals, terrorists, and others who would exploit the legal visa process to enter the United States and serves as ICE's front line in protecting the United States against terrorist and criminal organizations. The VSP integrates DHS law enforcement equities into the visa process to advance the Nation's border security initiatives. Under VSP, ICE agents are assigned to Visa Security Units (VSU) at high-priority diplomatic posts worldwide to conduct visa security activities and help identify potential criminal and/or terrorist threats before they reach a United States port of entry. 
1167. Kevin Lapp, (J.D. Candidate, NYU School of Law), INDIANA LAW 
JOURNAL, Fall 2012, 1614. The United States accepts more immigrants each year, from all over the world, than any other country. In 2009 alone, just under forty million individuals from 190 different countries came to the United States. 
1168. Bill Bartel, (Staff), VIRGINIAN-PILOT, Aug. 28, 2013, A1. But some say 
creating a special path to citizenship is unfair to the millions who are seeking lawful entry to the U.S. and those who are here legally and pursuing citizenship. U.S. Rep. Randy Forbes, R-Chesapeake, who opposes the Senate bill, has argued that a path to citizenship already exists under current law. "The cornerstone to any successful immigration plan must be the enforcement of our laws and the ability to actually secure our borders. We currently have a path to citizenship; however, the system is broken," said Forbes spokesman Dean Petrone. "We do need a plan to address those who are here illegally, but those that break our laws and illegally enter the United 
States should not be rewarded with blanket amnesty." 
1169. Deena Mueller, (J.D. Candidate), WILLIAM & MARY ENVIRONMENTAL 
LAW AND POLICY REVIEW, Spring 2013, 810. Today, there are an estimated eleven million illegal immigrants living in the U.S. Opponents of the immigration reform proposals worry that after setting the current eleven million illegal immigrants on a path to citizenship, this country will soon find itself host to millions of new illegal immigrants in need of another amnesty or earned citizenship option, all of which costs money. 
1170. Jonah Goldberg, (Staff), PITTSBURGH TRIBUNE REVIEW, Feb. 15, 2013. 
Retrieved Apr. 12, 2015 from Nexis. Conservative columnist Charles Krauthammer 
called immediate legalization "the functional equivalent of a green card" and "the very essence of amnesty." Blogger Mickey Kaus called the proposal "a giant incentive for people to come here illegally." And the Manhattan Institute's Heather Mac Donald wrote that it gives illegal immigrants "the immeasurable advantage of legal presence in the U.S. while waiting for their green card, unlike aliens obeying the 
law and waiting in their own country for permission to enter." 


1171. Philip Cafaro, (Prof., Philosophy, Colorado State U.), THE CHRONICLE OF HIGHER EDUCATION, Jan. 19, 2015. Retrieved Apr. 13, 2015 from Nexis. President Obama's recent executive actions to regularize the status of workers in the country illegally respond to genuine humanitarian concerns. Nevertheless, like previous amnesties, they are likely to encourage more illegal immigration by poor but desperate job seekers. 
1172. Mariela Olivares, (Prof., Law, Howard U. School of Law), HARVARD 
LATINO LAW REVIEW, Spr. 2013, 90. In the 2012 presidential campaign, immigration reform and the DREAM Act were volatile topics of debate. On June 15, 2012, President Obama announced that the Department of Homeland Security would no longer deport certain young undocumented immigrants who entered the United States as children, and instead offer them deferred action in an exercise of prosecutorial discretion. Further, he reaffirmed his commitment to the passage of the DREAM Act. While deferred action gives these undocumented immigrants a temporary reprieve from imminent deportation and the possibility of lawfully obtaining employment, it is not a permanent solution and does not grant them any long-term immigration status stability, as the DREAM Act would. 
1173. Philip Cafaro, (Prof., Philosophy, Colorado State U.), THE CHRONICLE OF 
HIGHER EDUCATION, Jan. 19, 2015. Retrieved Apr. 13, 2015 from Nexis. Significantly, immigration-driven competition has been strongest among working- class Americans, while wealthier, better-educated citizens have mostly been spared strong downward pressure on their incomes. According to an analysis by the Center for Immigration Studies, immigrants account for 35 percent of workers in building cleaning and maintenance, but only 10 percent in the corporate and financial sectors; 24 percent of workers in construction, but only 8 percent of teachers and college professors; 23 percent among food-preparation workers, but only 7 percent among lawyers. No wonder wealthy Americans and the bipartisan political elite that largely serves their interests typically support high levels of immigration. 
1174. Ann Robertson, (Ph.D., Political Science, George Washington U.), DEBATES 
ON U.S. IMMIGRATION, 2012, 237. Children of immigrants stress the current U.S. education system. A 1982 Supreme Court ruling established that states must provide free K-12 education to all children, whatever their legal status. Already tight school budgets have to add English language acquisition programs, additional teachers, larger schools, and expanded bus routes to accommodate students who may only stay a few months. Higher than average birth rates among many segments of the undocumented populations further increase demand for education and nutrition support. 
1175. Ann Robertson, (Ph.D., Political Science, George Washington U.), DEBATES 
ON U.S. IMMIGRATION, 2012, 239. Illegal immigrants without private health insurance resort to using hospital emergency rooms (ERs) for medical care. By law, hospital ERs cannot turn away indigent patients, but the influx of uninsured patients increases wait times for insured patients and leaves hospitals with millions of dollars in unreimbursed expenses, driving up the cost for paying patients. The American Hospital Association reports that its members provided $40 billion in uncompensated care in 2009. The --Medicare Modernization Act‖ of 2003 provided $250 million in federal money for hospitals treating the highest volume of undocumented patients, but that funding expired in 2008. Many hospitals are struggling to stay afloat, particularly hospitals located along the border with Mexico. 
1176. Carolyn J. Craig, (Administrator, U. Oregon), DEBATES ON U.S. 
IMMIGRATION, 2012, 125-126. Since the 1990s, the presence of more people in the United States due to mass migration has contributed to increases in carbon dioxide emissions, the production of billions of tons more waste, and the conversion of open space and farmland to housing developments. The demand for housing in urban areas - desirable in part due to the proximity to work for many people - has caused a significant increase in the property values, which in turn has forced more people to seek housing in the suburbs or more rural areas. This has contributed to the carbon dioxide emission increases and development mentioned above, as well as more time that Americans must spend commuting, and less time available for civic engagement in their home communities. 
1177. ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATCH, May 29, 2012, A14. Innumerable screeds on 
the Internet claim that the American Community Survey is unconstitutional because the U.S. Constitution specifies only a simple head count every 10 years. This is wrong, of course. Article 1, Section 2, of the Constitution says that censuses shall be conducted "in such Manner as [Congress] shall by Law direct." Congress passed laws establishing the American Community Survey. The federal courts have heard challenges to various census forms and surveys and have affirmed their constitutionality, most recently in a Texas case, Morales v. Evans, in 2000. That decision was affirmed by the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals; the U.S. Supreme Court declined to accept an appeal. The decision notes, among many things, that even the nation's first census, conducted in 1790, was more than a simple head count. 
1178. George Will, (Syndicated Columnist Washington Post), ST. PAUL PIONEER 
PRESS, July 12, 2013. Retrieved Apr. 12, 2015 from Nexis. Some incandescent conservatives propose forbidding the ACS to ask about respondents' religious beliefs and practices. But it does not ask. It is more interested in, for example, at what time respondents leave home for work, information that helps local governments plan traffic flows. The ACS does not seek to identify illegal immigrants, but by asking respondents their ethnicity, if they are citizens and how long they have been in the country, it informs public debate by estimating the number of illegal immigrants. 
1179. George Will, (Syndicated Columnist Washington Post), ST. PAUL PIONEER 
PRESS, July 12, 2013. Retrieved Apr. 12, 2015 from Nexis. Information improves the efficiency of markets - and of governments, too. There are systemic reasons why democratic governments frequently behave foolishly: Politicians' constant incentive is to confer current benefits on targeted beneficiaries and to defer costs (by running deficits). Hence there are weak incentives to formulate government policies with the quaint characteristic of measurably ameliorating broad social problems. The ACS cannot cure systemic problems but abolishing it would require government to be unnecessarily ignorant. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	94 
 
 
 
1180. George Will, (Syndicated Columnist Washington Post), ST. PAUL PIONEER PRESS, July 12, 2013. Retrieved Apr. 12, 2015 from Nexis. Secrecy is government regulation - the rationing of information. The collection and dissemination of useful information by government serve the deregulation of life by empowering the public to direct the government, to judge its performance, and to decrease dependence on government by invigorating the private sector. 
1181. George Will, (Syndicated Columnist Washington Post), ST. PAUL PIONEER 
PRESS, July 12, 2013. Retrieved Apr. 12, 2015 from Nexis. In the absence of data, politicians pluck factoids from the ether, as Barack Obama did in this year's State of the Union address: "Every dollar we invest in high-quality early childhood education can save more than seven dollars later on, by boosting graduation rates, reducing teen pregnancy, even reducing violent crime." Such facially implausible and utterly unsubstantiated claims flourish when there is indifference to information. 
1182. George Will, (Syndicated Columnist, Washington Post), ST. PAUL PIONEER 
PRESS, July 12, 2013. Retrieved Apr. 12, 2015 from Nexis. The Welfare Reform Act of 1996, which was applied conservatism, happened because empirical data convinced enough Democrats of the costs of welfare dependency. Charles Murray, the most consequential and conservative contemporary social scientist ("Losing Ground," "Coming Apart"), depends on ACS and other census surveys. Sociologist Peter Rossi, a liberal Democrat and an accomplished analyst of social programs, formulated two "metallic rules" of policy evaluation. The Iron Law is: "The expected value of any net impact assessment of any large scale social program is zero." The Stainless Steel Law is: "The better designed the impact assessment of a social program, the more likely is the resulting estimate of net impact to be zero." Clearly, conservatives should favor the nation applying to itself the injunction "Know thyself." Besides, if conservatives do not think information about society - the more 
the merrier - strengthens their case, why are they conservatives? 
1183. Terri Ann Lowenthal, (Former Staff Dir., Census Oversight Subcommittee, 
House of Representatives), U.S. CENSUS, 2012, 26. As the Brookings Institution [a nonprofit, public policy organization] reported this summer, $416 billion in fiscal year 2008 federal program funds were allocated to states and localities using data from the American Community Survey. 
1184. The Economist, U.S. CENSUS, 2012, 52. In autocracies, people try to keep out 
of censuses. In democracies, by contrast, they want to be in them, for censuses mean numbers, and numbers mean money and power. The American census, for example, determines how around $200 billion a year of federal funds is shared out, for everything from education and welfare to highways. Such rich pickings mean that censuses are well worth fighting over. 
1185. American Association of Public Opinion Research, THE PROS AND CONS 
OF MAKING THE CENSUS BUREAU'S AMERICAN COMMUNITY SURVEY VOLUNTARY, House Oversight and Government Reform Comm. Hearing, Mar. 6, 2012, 34. In addition, the Voting Rights Act relies on ACS data to make determinations under section 203, which requires jurisdictions with a high percentage of people who are not English language proficient to offer bilingual voting materials. Both the government and business sector rely on ACS data to help ensure appropriate employment opportunities for racial minorities, disabled persons, and veterans. 
1186. Bruce Wright, (Dir., Demos), THE PROS AND CONS OF MAKING THE 
CENSUS BUREAU'S AMERICAN COMMUNITY SURVEY VOLUNTARY, House Oversight and Government Reform Comm. Hearing, Mar. 6, 2012, 28. A voluntary ACS is a drastically less accurate ACS. For this and other reasons, making either individual questions of the ACS or the entire survey voluntary would destroy the quality of the data. As any statistician knows, a random sampling of a population that is representative of the nation as a whole is the entire foundation on which data analysis is based, Making all or parts of the survey voluntary would introduce what is called --response bias‖ into the data, as it has been proven that non-response is not random, Introducing this bias into the data collection would in turn undermine the random nature of the data collection, and thus diminish the survey's standing as a presider source of accurate, representative data. 
1187. American Association of Public Opinion Research, THE PROS AND CONS 
OF MAKING THE CENSUS BUREAU'S AMERICAN COMMUNITY SURVEY VOLUNTARY, House Oversight and Government Reform Comm. Hearing, Mar. 6, 2012, 33. Concerned about respondent burden and the propriety of the questions, Congress directed the Census Bureau to explore the possibility of making the ACS voluntary in 2003. In two reports' and several more recent analyses, the bureau concluded that mail response rates to a voluntary ACS' would drop --dramatically,‖ by more than 20 percentage points. That decline, in turn, would force the bureau to use more costly modes of data collection, such as telephone and door-to-door visits, thereby increasing the cost of the survey by thirty percent ($60 million at the time of the 2003 field test). Congress, in the current fiscal climate, is unlikely to increase funding for the ACS by the amount necessary to overcome low initial response rates, leaving the Census Bureau with insufficient response to produce reliable data for smaller (e.g. rural communities; towns; urban neighborhoods) areas and population groups (e.g. people with disabilities; veterans; immigrant groups). The consequence would be greatly diminished quality of ACS data. The test also showed that the percent of completed interviews (conducted if a household fails to mail back a form) fell significantly if the survey was voluntary, adding to the problem of data reliability. 
1188. Robert N. Rodriguez, (Pres. American Statistical Association), THE PROS 
AND CONS OF MAKING THE CENSUS BUREAU'S AMERICAN COMMUNITY SURVEY VOLUNTARY, House Oversight and Government Reform Comm. Hearing, Mar. 6, 2012, 39. As noted by others submitting statements for the hearing record, Census Bureau field research demonstrates that making participation in the ACS voluntary would result in a 20 percent point drop in the response rate and a 30 percent rise in total costs ($75 million) needed to maintain current levels of data reliability, due to the need for telephone and in-person follow- up to a larger number of non-respondents. 


1189. David Shapiro, (Prof., Law, Northwestern U.), COLUMBIA HUMAN RIGHTS LAW REVIEW, Fall 2012, 53. On April 3, 2006, BOP published a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) entitled "Limited Communication for Terrorist Inmates." The 2006 NPRM set forth the central concern that ultimately resulted in the creation of CMUs [Communication Management Units]: --Past behaviors of terrorist inmates provide sufficient grounds to suggest a substantial risk that they may inspire or incite terrorist-related activity, especially if communicated to groups willing to become martyrs, or to provide equipment or logistics to carry out terrorist-related activities. The potential ramifications of this activity outweigh the inmate's interest in 
unlimited communications with persons in the community.‖ 
1190. Rachel Simon, (JD, Seton Hall U. School of Law), SETON HALL LAW 
REVIEW, 2015, 361. While privileged communications are inadmissible at trial, law enforcement officers are not entirely prohibited from intercepting telephone conversations between attorney and client under the Wiretap Act. Section 2518(5) requires that electronic eavesdropping be conducted "in such a way as to minimize the interception of communications not otherwise subject to interception," including privileged and, presumably, constitutionally-protected communications. Never- theless, law enforcement officers who have lawfully established a wiretap can monitor attorney-client communications to the extent necessary to determine that the attorney is not participating in criminal activity along with the subject of their 
investigation. This is known as the "crime fraud exception." 
1191. Keith Alexander, (Dir., NSA), LETTER TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE 
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION, Mar. 10, 2014. Retrieved May 5, 2015 from https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/assets/alexander_aba_response.pdf. As [HYPERLINK: http://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/assets/alexander_aba_response.pdf] soon as it becomes apparent that a communication is between a person who is known to be under a criminal indictment in the United States and an attorney who represents that individual in the matter under indictment (or someone acting on behalf of the attorney), monitoring of that communication will cease and the communication will be identified as an attorney-client communication in a log maintained for that purpose. The relevant portion of the communication containing that conversation will be segregated and the National Security Division of the Department of Justice will be notified so that appropriate procedures may be established to protect such communications from review or use in any criminal prosecution, while preserving foreign intelligence information contained therein. 
1192. Michelle Malkin, (Analyst, Independent Institute), THE LEFT'S VALENTINE 
TO DEFIANT JIHAD-ENABLER LYNNE STEWART, Feb. 7, 2013. Retrieved 
May 5, 2015 from http://michellemalkin.com/2014/02/07/the-lefts-valentine-to-  [HYPERLINK: http://michellemalkin.com/2014/02/07/the-lefts-valentine-to-]defiant-jihad-enabler-lynne-stewart/. Stewart was convicted in 2005 of helping terrorist Omar Abdel Rahman  --  the murderous Blind Sheik  --  smuggle coded 
messages of Islamic violence to outside followers in violation of an explicit pledge to 
abide by her client's court-ordered isolation. Rahman, Stewart's --political client,‖ had called on Muslims to --destroy‖ the West, --burn their companies, eliminate their interests, sink their ships, shoot down their planes, kill them on the sea, air or land.‖ He issued bloody fatwas against U.S. --infidels‖ that inspired the 1993 WTC bombing, the 1997 massacre of Western tourists in Luxor, Egypt, and the 9/11 attacks. 
1193. Michelle Malkin, (Analyst, Independent Institute), THE LEFT'S VALENTINE 
TO DEFIANT JIHAD-ENABLER LYNNE STEWART, Feb. 7, 2013. Retrieved May 5, 2015 from http://michellemalkin.com/2014/02/07/the-lefts-valentine-to-  [HYPERLINK: http://michellemalkin.com/2014/02/07/the-lefts-valentine-to-]defiant-jihad-enabler-lynne-stewart/. Stewart ignored a judge's communications ban, transmitting Rahman's edicts of violence to fellow jihadist Rifa'l Ahman Tara in Egypt. She smuggled out a coded order to his followers lifting a ceasefire between his terrorist group and the Egyptian government. She personally delivered one of the messages to a Reuters reporter. Far from the innocent grandma her supporters continue to portray her as, Stewart was caught on video making distracting --covering noises‖  --  tapping the table, shaking a water jar  --  for the Blind Sheik's translator to evade the communications ban. 
1194. Jonathan Caulkins, (Prof., Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon U.), MARIJUANA 
LEGALIZATION: WHAT EVERYONE NEEDS TO KNOW, 2012, 113. Users, simply as users, rarely spend much time behind bars. But marijuana growers, importers, and dealers risk felony convictions and prison terms, some of them very long; at any one time, there are about forty thousand such prisoners. 
1195. Jonathan Caulkins, (Prof., Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon U.), MARIJUANA 
LEGALIZATION: WHAT EVERYONE NEEDS TO KNOW, 2012, 129. Would legalizing marijuana at least cut in half the number of drug law violators behind bars? Again, no; not even close. University of South Carolina criminologist Eric Sevigny estimates that only about 8 percent of state and federal prison inmates serving time for drug law violations were marijuana-only offenders. 
1196. Jonathan Caulkins, (Prof., Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon U.), RETHINKING 
THE WAR ON DRUGS, 2012, 110. Legalizing marijuana would also only modestly impact drug harms in the US Even though marijuana accounts for most drug use and nearly half of all drug arrests, marijuana's social costs are relatively low. It represents only about 8% of drug-related imprisonment, one-sixth of user spending, and about 16% of treatment admissions. 
1197. Sylvia Longmire, (Former U.S. Air Force Officer & Intelligence Analyst), 
BORDER INSECURITY: WHY BIG MONEY, FENCES, AND DRONES AREN'T MAKING US SAFER, 2014, 70. Over a decade ago, DHS deployed dozens of Vehicle and Cargo Inspection Systems (VACIS), which use gamma rays (as opposed to X-rays) to help CBP inspectors look for hidden compartments in vehicles and trains. Used at various ports of entry, the systems can be taken apart and put back together in a day, making them portable. When a vehicle or train is scanned, the image is sent to a terminal where a CBP inspector can look for dense areas that might contain illegal drugs or other contraband. If the agent sees something suspicious, then he or she can take the next step of calling for a canine unit or detailed manual inspection. The mobile version of VACIS can scan at seven feet per second, and speed and accuracy are crucial at ports of entry where trains don't fully stop unless CBP agents have good reason to believe contraband is on board. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	95 
 
 
 
1198. Sylvia Longmire, (Former U.S. Air Force Officer & Intelligence Analyst), BORDER INSECURITY: WHY BIG MONEY, FENCES, AND DRONES AREN'T MAKING US SAFER, 2014, 70-71. Mobile scanning technology is a critical CBP tool, and they expanded their arsenal through the introduction of Z Backscatter Vans in 2007. These vans scan using X-rays; the rays scatter after they interact with various organic and inorganic materials. The signals are particularly strong whenever the incident X-rays interact with explosives, plastics, and other biological items. Of particular benefit to CBP is the fact that the vans can scan and move at the same time, which means the time to scan multiple tractor trailers or cargo containers at a seaport can be significantly reduced. 
1199. Sylvia Longmire, (Former U.S. Air Force Officer & Intelligence Analyst), 
BORDER INSECURITY: WHY BIG MONEY, FENCES, AND DRONES AREN'T MAKING US SAFER, 2014, 70. The majority of reliable and useful technology currently employed along our land borders, with a few exceptions, seems to be located at the ports of entry where it's all about scanning - seeing into cars, trucks, and trains, and sometimes into people. Tens of thousands of cars line up every single day so their occupants can cross our borders into places like Detroit, Buffalo, San Diego, and El Paso for work, shopping, vacation, or a friendly visit. Sometimes those border crossings have sinister purposes, like transporting illegal drugs, people, cash, or firearms. CBP inspectors can't possibly hope to personally inspect more than a small percentage of these cars and trucks, so they have increasingly relied on a variety of scanning devices. 
1200. Paul Stockton, (U.S. Undersecretary of Defense for Homeland Security), 
BOOTS ON THE GROUND OR EYES IN THE SKY: HOW BEST TO UTILIZE THE NATIONAL GUARD TO ACHIEVE OPERATIONAL CONTROL, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Apr. 17, 2012, 8. Drug trafficking and related transnational organized crime presents a significant threat to our Nation. The movement of large amounts of drugs across our borders is the most immediate concern, but the potential for these drug smuggling networks to be used for infiltrating terrorists and weapons of mass destruction cannot be discounted. As such, countering drug trafficking across our borders and around the world is a National priority. 
1201. Michael Braun, (Managing Partner, Spectre Group International), 
COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 21. The nexus between drugs and terrorism is growing at a rate far faster than most policy makers in Washington, DC choose to admit, and far fewer will even talk about. In many ways this is not an entirely new threat; various U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) leaders have testified before Congress on many occasions over the past 35 years regarding the illicit global drug trade funding terrorist organizations and insurgencies around the world. 
1202. Michael Braun, (Managing Partner, Spectre Group International), 
COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 32. The DEA has conservatively linked at least half of the FTOs [Foreign Terrorist Organizations] with involvement in one or more aspects of the global drug trade, but I believe that number to be far greater, especially when considering that there are so many ways to make hundreds of millions, if not billions of dollars in the industry. Generating contraband revenue from involvement in the industry can include the taxing of farmers, taxing finished drugs and the movement of drugs and precursor chemicals across borders, providing security to traditional cartels at clandestine laboratories, cache sites and airstrips, the manufacture of drugs, the transportation of drugs, and the distribution of drugs. 
1203. Michael Braun, (Managing Partner, Spectre Group International), 
COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 21-22. The plot to assassinate the Saudi Arabian Ambassador to the United States that was recently foiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) qualifies as the perfect example of the threat posed by the ability of Iran's proxies to operate freely in the Western Hemisphere, and their ability to collaborate with organized crime. A member of the Quds Force and an American of Iranian ancestry hired a DEA informant, believing the source to be a member of the ultra-violent Los Zetas drug trafficking organization, to carry out the assassination of the Saudi Ambassador - on U.S. soil. 
1204. Michael Braun, (Managing Partner, Spectre Group International), 
COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 22. More and more FT0s [Foreign Terrorist Organizations], just like the Hezbollah and Quds Force, are turning to the global drug trade, and to a lesser degree, other transnational criminal activity, to fund their operations, because our country and our partners have been enormously successful in prosecuting the Global War on Terror (GWOT). 
1205. Michael Braun, (Managing Partner, Spectre Group International), 
COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 33. There is a third motivation that appears to be unique to al-Qaeda (AQ). Our Government has so disrupted AQ's ability to direct and manage (command and control) its cells and nodes around the globe, that the organization has been forced to shift from a --corporate‖ leadership model to a --franchise‖ mode of operation. In other words AQ's cells and nodes, in many ways, have been left up to their own devices to function, including self-sufficiency when it comes to funding their operations. Some of these cells and nodes are resorting to drug trafficking to do just that. The AQ cell, or affiliated cell, depending upon with whom you speak, that was responsible for the Madrid train bombings, funded that operation almost in its entirety through the sale of MDMA, also known as ecstasy, and hashish. 


1206. Michael Braun, (Managing Partner, Spectre Group International), COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 22. There are myriad transnational criminal endeavors in which terrorist organizations can and do engage; however, nothing comes close to producing the kind of revenue that the global drug trade generates. The United Nations (UN) estimates that the global drug trade generates about $322 billion dollars annually, and estimates that the revenue generated by the drug trade flowing between Mexico, the United States and Canada is $147 billion dollars annually. The Office of National Drug Control Policy (the U.S. Drug Czar's office) estimates that our fellow citizens generate about $65 billion dollars a year attempting to satisfy their insatiable appetite for drugs. By comparison, the United Nations estimates that the next closest illicit global market, alien trafficking, generates approximately $32 billion dollars and that the illicit global arms trade generates about $10 billion dollars annually. 
1207. Michael Braun, (Managing Partner, Spectre Group International), 
COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 23. The investigation paints a troubling picture of the Hezbollah's growing involvement in cocaine trafficking and reveals that as much as $200 million dollars per month in drug proceeds was being laundered by the terrorist group through the financial institutions. 
1208. Michael Braun, (Managing Partner, Spectre Group International), 
COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 25. In the context of funding a terrorist organization, it is important to understand that the cost of an actual terrorist attack is minimal. The Madrid train bombings, which were funded through drug trafficking by the al-Qaeda-affiliated cell, only cost about $70 thousand dollars to pull off. Although there is no evidence to indicate that any part of the 9/11 terrorist attack on the United States was paid for by drug trafficking activity, most experts agree that the 9/11 attacks only cost al-Qaeda about $500,000. 
1209. Michael Braun, (Managing Partner, Spectre Group International), 
COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 27. More leaders in our Government need to understand that when we follow the money, we can go in any direction we choose. However, they must also understand that drugs are routinely traded for the most sophisticated weapons systems in the world, and they are traded for money, counterfeit documents, the services of human traffickers and other smuggling groups; I call this --the currency of contraband.‖ There is ample evidence that the Quds Force routinely attempts to trade heroin for sanctioned equipment of military value. 
1210. Michael Braun, (Managing Partner, Spectre Group International), 
COMPILATION OF HEARINGS ON ISLAMIST RADICALIZATION VOLUME III, House Homeland Security Committee Hearings, June 20, 2012, 29. Global DTOs [drug trafficking organizations] and FTOs [foreign terrorist organizations] live, multiply, and operate in exactly the same ungoverned space, at exactly the same time, in exactly the same manner. More and more they contend for exactly the same money, generated by the same illicit enterprise, drug trafficking. They rely on the same shadow facilitators to operate: The arms traffickers, alien smugglers, money launderers, and document counterfeiters to name just a few. 
1211. Edward Follis, (Former Drug Enforcement Agency Officer), THE DARK 
ART: MY UNDERCOVER LIFE IN GLOBAL NARCO-TERRORISM, 2014, 248. Narco-terrorism is now the face of twenty-first-century organized crime. Far-flung groups like the Taliban, Hamas, Hezbollah, and FARC (Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia) are two-headed monsters: hybrids of highly structured global drug-trafficking cartels and politically motivated terrorists. 
1212. Michael McCaul, (Chair, House Comm. on Homeland Security), A NEW 
PERSPECTIVE ON THREATS TO THE HOMELAND, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Feb. 13, 2013, 2. Drug cartels fight for primacy on our Southern Border, sending narcotics into our homes. Smugglers weaken our economic competitiveness at our ports of entry while terrorists still seek entry into the United States undetected. 
1213. Jonathan Schanzer, (Vice President, Foundation for Defense of Democracies), 
TERRORIST FINANCING SINCE 9/11: ASSESSING AN EVOLVING AL- QAEDA AND STATE SPONSORS OF TERRORISM, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 18, 2012, 8. Broadly speaking, terrorist financiers are increasingly shifting to criminal activity. Earlier this year, U.S. authorities indicted a vast Hezbollah network for money laundering, cocaine deals, and more - exposing 30 U.S.-based car dealerships that helped the group move cash. Similarly, Senator Dianne Feinstein recently noted how the Taliban relies heavily on profits from the heroin trade to finance its operations. 
1214. John Camara, (Former Special Agent, U.S. Department of the Treasury), 
TERRORIST FINANCING SINCE 9/11: ASSESSING AN EVOLVING AL- QAEDA AND STATE SPONSORS OF TERRORISM, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 18, 2012, 15. In many cases, a symbiosis is developing between organized crime and terrorist organizations, and this sort of link has been observed around the world. As I detail in a book I co-authored with former Treasury official Avi Jorisch, On the Trail of Terror Finance: What Law Enforcement and Intelligence Officers Need to Know we have observed individual terrorists and terrorist groups involvement with narcotics trafficking, intellectual property rights violations or trafficking in counterfeit goods, cigarette smuggling, robberies, credit card scams, fraud, trafficking in stolen cars, kidnapping for ransom, extortion, and other serious crimes. Unfortunately, self-finance in this way is much harder to detect, track, and disrupt. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	96 
 
 
 
1215. Roland Heickero, (Prof., Swedish National Defense College), THE DARK SIDES OF THE INTERNET: ON CYBER THREATS AND INFORMATION WARFARE, 2013, 74-75. A report by the DEA, quoted in the 2008 Congress report, says that 14 of 23 identified terrorist organisations were involved in drug trafficking in 2004. The Islamist organisations were especially active. The annual turnover from narcotics in Afghanistan is estimated to be more 30 billion U.S. dollars. Drug money from the area, together with contributions from sympathisers, have become an important source of revenue for the Taliban and al-Qaeda. This should be seen in the light of the total annual turnover from narcotics, which is assessed to be 400 billion 
U.S. dollars. 
1216. Sylvia Longmire, (Former U.S. Air Force Officer & Intelligence Analyst), 
BORDER INSECURITY: WHY BIG MONEY, FENCES, AND DRONES AREN'T MAKING US SAFER, 2014, 5-6. Members and associates of Mexican drug cartels have a presence in over 1,000 US cities and are responsible for providing 90 percent of the illegal drugs consumed by Americans on a daily basis. Millions of immigrants from all over the world enter the United States illegally from Mexico every year, and while most of them are simply looking for work, hundreds, if not thousands, come every year from --specially designated countries‖ that sponsor, promote, or are somehow associated with terrorism. Each year, the number of media reports about armed confrontations between drug traffickers and law enforcement officers on US soil increases. 
1217. George Will, (Syndicated Columnist), WASHINGTON POST, Apr. 5, 2012, 
A15. So, suppose cocaine or heroin were legalized and marketed as cigarettes and alcohol are. And suppose the level of addiction were to replicate the 7 percent of adults suffering from alcohol abuse or dependency. That would be a public health 
disaster. As the late James Q. Wilson said, nicotine shortens life, cocaine debases it. 
1218. Jonathan Caulkins, (Prof., Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon U.), MARIJUANA 
LEGALIZATION: WHAT EVERYONE NEEDS TO KNOW, 2012, 107-108. Compared to prohibition, legalization is likely to increase the number of people who wind up abusing or becoming dependent on the newly legalized drug. To legalize a drug, then -- as the U.S. federal government did with alcohol in 1933 and a state or nation may do with marijuana sometime in the near future -- is to choose the problems associated with increased levels of excessive consumption over the problems associated with illicit dealing and enforcement. 
1219. George Will, (Syndicated Columnist), WASHINGTON POST, Apr. 5, 2012, 
A15. Legalization would mean drugs of reliable quality would be conveniently available from clean stores for customers not risking the stigma of breaking the law in furtive transactions with unsavory people. So there is no reason to think today's levels of addiction are anywhere near the levels that would be reached under legalization. 
1220. Jonathan Caulkins, (Prof., Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon U.), RETHINKING 
THE WAR ON DRUGS, 2012, 116. We cannot be confident of any particular prediction or bound for how much legalization would drive up use or dependence because there is no historical precedent for a modern industrialized country facing such low prices. So legalization's effect on consumption could fall anywhere along a very broad range. Imagine though, for simplicity, there are just two possible outcomes. In the "good" outcome, dependency would increase only moderately, so that the benefit of eliminating black markets more than offsets the problems of greater dependency, resulting in lower aggregate social costs. In the "bad" outcome, the increase in dependence is high enough for the accompanying social costs to surpass prohibition levels, despite the benefits of reduced crime, corruption, and drug enforcement. If legalization turns out badly, then reimposing prohibition would not undo the damage. One would get back all the original black market problems of crime and enforcement costs, but multiplied several-fold by the extent to which long- term dependency had gone up during the interval of legalization. 
1221. Jonathan Caulkins, (Prof., Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon U.), MARIJUANA 
LEGALIZATION: WHAT EVERYONE NEEDS TO KNOW, 2012, 68. Kids who use marijuana -- particularly those who start marijuana use at a young age -- are statistically much more likely to go on to use other drugs than their peers who do not use marijuana. 
1222. Itai Danovitch, (Prof., Psychiatry, UCLA School of Medicine), MCGEORGE 
LAW REVIEW, 2012, 104. In sufficient doses, marijuana can cause psychosis, a state of mind characterized by the inability to distinguish between what is real and what is not. Psychosis is concerning for three reasons. First, the loss of connection to reality can be an emotionally terrifying experience. Second, psychosis can stimulate unsafe behavior when the lack of connection to reality inhibits the ability to determine what is safe and what is not. Third, there is mounting evidence that psychosis itself is harmful to the brain and may actually predispose the brain to psychotic disorders. In addition to causing psychosis, marijuana may also contribute to the development of lifelong psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia. Schizophrenia is a disorder characterized by deterioration in thinking, disturbances in perception, and impairments in social function. 
1223. Itai Danovitch, (Prof., Psychiatry, UCLA School of Medicine), MCGEORGE 
LAW REVIEW, 2012, 105. A relationship between marijuana and poor educational attainment has been repeatedly demonstrated across many studies. The relationship appears to hold even when confounding variables are statistically controlled. School performance is a function of many factors, but it is likely that the short-term effects of marijuana intoxication exacerbate existing school difficulties and push poor performance into school failure. 
1224. Jonathan Caulkins, (Prof., Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon U.), MARIJUANA 
LEGALIZATION: WHAT EVERYONE NEEDS TO KNOW, 2012, 66. A study by Sarah Aldington and colleagues affiliated with the Cannabis and Respiratory Disease Research Group found that smoking the equivalent of a joint a day for a year increased the probability of lung cancer by 8 percent, after controlling for cigarette consumption. (That's 8 percent of the relatively low base rate for lung cancer, not an 
8 percent chance of getting cancer.) 


1225. Jonathan Caulkins, (Prof., Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon U.), MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION: WHAT EVERYONE NEEDS TO KNOW, 2012, 72. Over a lifetime, between one in four and one in five people experience psychotic symptoms at least once. When Moore and colleagues pooled the results of the existing studies, they found that marijuana use increased the risk of experiencing a psychotic symptom by at least 40 percent, with the figure increasing for those who used marijuana more often. 
1226. Jonathan Caulkins, (Prof., Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon U.), MARIJUANA 
LEGALIZATION: WHAT EVERYONE NEEDS TO KNOW, 2012, 176. It is not even clear that a 20 percent reduction in total revenue would lead to a proportionate reduction in violence. It might. Or it might prompt reallocation of "soldiers" from drug trafficking into other activities, some of which might generate greater violence per person or per million dollars than drug trafficking does. And even if the DTOs laid off these soldiers rather than reassigning them, the alternate work they sought might or might not be peaceful. 
1227. Jonathan Caulkins, (Prof., Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon U.), MARIJUANA 
LEGALIZATION: WHAT EVERYONE NEEDS TO KNOW, 2012, 176. It is not clear how a 20 percent reduction in drug export revenue -- to pick one plausible figure -- would affect DTO violence. In the first place, a 20 percent reduction in drug export revenue does not imply a 20 percent reduction in total revenue. Despite the "D" in the acronym, DTOs are diversified criminal enterprises that parlay their capacity for violence into a variety of revenue streams including kidnapping, extortion, carjacking, and other activities. 
1228. Paul Kan, (Prof., Military Studies, U.S. Army War College), CARTELS AT 
WAR: MEXICO'S DRUG-FUELED VIOLENCE AND THE THREAT TO U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 134. There is not a single country that has fully legalized the distribution and use of all narcotics. Legalization in the United States would do little to change the illegal status of the international trade of hard drugs produced from poppies, coca, and cannabis and synthetic chemicals. 
1229. Ted Galen Carpenter, (Sr. Fellow, Cato Institute), THE FIRE NEXT DOOR: 
MEXICO'S DRUG VIOLENCE AND THE DANGER TO AMERICA, 2012, 237. In short, those who are looking for a collapse of demand in the United States to weaken the Mexican drug cartels and reduce their power are basing their hopes on an illusion. And even in the unlikely event that U.S. demand did plummet, the beneficial impact would be far less than optimists suppose. As noted in chapter 10, the U.S. market is only one part -- albeit the most important part -- of a large global market for the consumption of illicit drugs. True, the U.S. market is especially important to the Mexican cartels, but the global market is growing at a brisk rate, and those organizations are moving to exploit that growth. The bottom line is that even if demand declined further in the United States, there are enough current and potential customers elsewhere in the world to make the trafficking business very profitable. Demand reduction in the United States is not a meaningful strategy for undercutting the power of the Mexican drug cartels and providing a solution to the violence in that unhappy country. 
1230. Nora Hamilton, (Prof., Political Science, U. of Southern California), 
POLITICS OF LATIN AMERICA: THE POWER GAME, 2012, 340. In recent years, the growing crime and violence associated with drug trafficking and the government's war on drugs have become major issues in Mexico. Drug cartels have expanded their activities to include kidnappings, extortion, and smuggling, and battles between drug cartels as well as random killings have intensified levels of fear and insecurity, particularly in the border areas, but increasingly throughout the country. These conditions appear to have been aggravated by the government's militarization of the drug war. 
1231. Paul Kan, (Prof., Military Studies, U.S. Army War College), CARTELS AT 
WAR: MEXICO'S DRUG-FUELED VIOLENCE AND THE THREAT TO U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 136. With well-established smuggling routes in place, cartels can turn their networks toward other illicit trade unrelated to drugs. Human trafficking, for example, is a lucrative trade whose profits are competitive with illicit narcotics. 
1232. Paul Kan, (Prof., Military Studies, U.S. Army War College), CARTELS AT 
WAR: MEXICO'S DRUG-FUELED VIOLENCE AND THE THREAT TO U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 136. This leads to a third problem with the legalization approach -- as violent entrepreneurs, Mexican cartels may adapt their proficiency in violence to service any new dynamics that drug legalization brings. Cartels and gangs may choose to move into the market for prescription drugs. Prices for them are much lower in Mexico than in the United States, meaning that cartels could divert prescription drugs to compensate for the closure of any markets for narcotics caused by legalization. 
1233. Jonathan Caulkins, (Prof., Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon U.), RETHINKING 
THE WAR ON DRUGS, 2012, 110. It is very hard to know how losing perhaps one- fifth of drug-related revenues would affect DTO violence. Perhaps it would cut violence by as much as one-fifth, but the DTOs might respond by trafficking more of other drugs or shifting focus to nondrug-related activities such as kidnapping, human trafficking, or racketeering. What is certain though is that legalizing marijuana in the US will not make the DTOs go away. 
1234. Jonathan Caulkins, (Prof., Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon U.), RETHINKING 
THE WAR ON DRUGS, 2012, 109. Would legalizing marijuana reduce violence in Mexico? Advocates such as former New Mexico governor Gary Johnson argue that legalizing marijuana is "the only practical way to weaken drug cartels", often citing an Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) document which asserted that 61% of DTO revenues derive from marijuana exports. However, 61% is a gross exaggeration even for strictly drug-related revenues, and DTOs also generate considerable revenue from nondrug-related activities. Kilmer et al. debunk the 61% figure and estimate the correct proportion to be more like 15-26% of drug-related revenues. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	97 
 
 
 
1235. Paul Kan, (Prof., Military Studies, U.S. Army War College), CARTELS AT WAR: MEXICO'S DRUG-FUELED VIOLENCE AND THE THREAT TO U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY, 2012, 80. An additional complication created by the involvement of drug cartels in human smuggling is their capacity to assist in the hundreds of illegal border crossings of people from special-interest countries like China, Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan, and Pakistan. Reportedly, some alien smuggling organizations and Mexican cartels specialize in smuggling special-interest aliens into the United States. "Gangs' most significant potential contribution to terrorism within the United States, though, is probably not direct association but by infiltrating terrorists into the U.S. and providing opportunities for them to conduct 
reconnaissance and attacks." 
1236. Jonathan Caulkins, (Prof., Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon U.), MARIJUANA 
LEGALIZATION: WHAT EVERYONE NEEDS TO KNOW, 2012, 114-115. Making a drug legal does not entirely eliminate the law-enforcement problem. Any regulation or any tax strict enough or high enough to actually restrict or change behavior will face defiance and require enforcement. About a million and a half arrests are made each year on the charge of driving under the influence of alcohol: nearly twice as many as for all marijuana violations combined. That's in addition to arrests for sales to minors, possession by minors, drinking in public, and drunk and disorderly conduct. The law against alcohol use by minors is massively evaded, creating both large numbers of arrests and contempt for a law that seems so unreasonable to many -- if a twenty-year-old can get married or enlist, why can't he buy a beer? -- and is so widely defied. 
1237. Jeffrey Penn, (Staff, New York Academy of Sciences), AT ISSUE: 
STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2008. Retrieved Oct. 22, 2014 from the Opposing Viewpoints Resource Center. The limitations and value of the SAT are intensely debated, but the standardized college admissions test continues to be a reliable predictor of college success. In addition, for some subjects, SAT scores are statistically more consistent predictors of college freshman grades than high school grades. The new version of the SAT, renamed the SAT Reasoning Test, was introduced in March 2005 and contains an essay section that measures writing abilities. Optimally, both high school grades and SAT scores are considered in admissions decisions, but the SAT remains an important assessment of cognitive abilities. 
1238. Jeffrey Penn, (Staff, New York Academy of Sciences), AT ISSUE: 
STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2008. Retrieved Dec. 10, 2014 from the Opposing Viewpoints Resource Center. Despite some limitations and the intense criticism by opponents of standardized testing, colleges and universities can reliably use admissions tests to screen applicants, according to an expert who spoke on the subject during a November 19 [2001] lecture entitled "Predicting College Success Value and Limitations of the SAT, High School Grades and Other Factors" "The SAT is the most vigorously and well-researched test in the world, and yet nothing seems to be more controversial than the SAT," said Wayne Camara, vice president for development and Research at the College Board [the organization that administers the SAT]. "Thousands of validity studies and intense analysis of the SAT reveals that it has helped to reliably predict college success when SAT scores are compared with college freshman grade point averages," Camara said. "And although there are fewer validity studies that explore overall success in college, the SAT is also a good indicator of four-year grade point averages," he added. 
1239. Don Hooper, (President, American Association of School Administrators), 
SCHOOL ADMINISTRATOR, Dec. 2001, p. 38. During my term as AASA [American Association of School Administrators] president, I have had the opportunity to meet with leading educators nationally and internationally. Most of those who speak the loudest against strong accountability systems are those who have the least experience with them. Or perhaps they have had experience with poorly designed systems. Most of those with extensive experience working with strong accountability systems are the strongest advocates. They know firsthand that the systems improve student success. Our role is to properly design systems that will lead to successful outcomes for students. Properly designed systems must be built over time. The Texas journey has been a 20-year experience. Positive results can be seen in just a few years. However, patience, plus the engagement of all stakeholders, is necessary for proper system design. 
1240. Richard Phelps, (Ph.D., U. Pennsylvania & Director of Research and Strategic 
Resources, The Association of Boarding Schools), DEFENDING STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 84. On average, however, the use of testing tends to improve academic achievement. The evidence for this proposition is overwhelming and voluminous. Many articles written acclaiming the contrary begin with statements like --Much research has shown that standardized testing, particularly when it is high- stakes, produces mostly negative consequences.‖ Follow the references and look at the details, however, and one is likely to find, as I have, that the articles cited may consist of little more than unsupported declarations, and most of the rest found positive effective on student achievement, but education administrators, and maybe teachers, disliked the test for other reasons, such as the limits that standards and tests impose on their freedom. Granted, then, I am ignoring the most popular complaints of testing critics. If a testing program clearly improves student achievement, but teachers or administrators do not like it simply because they are made to change the manner and content of their work from that which they personally prefer, I admit that I really don't much care, and neither should any taxpayer or parent. The public schools do not exist so that education professionals can spend their workdays in a manner that optimizes their personal pleasure and preferences. They exist to educate students. 
1241. Gregory Cizek, (Prof., Education, U. of North Carolina at Chapel Hill), 
DEFENDING STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, xv. Standardized tests can produce at least three benefits: improved diagnosis (of student's strengths and weaknesses); improved prediction and selection (for college, scholarships, or employment) and; most controversial, improved achievement. That is, do students in school systems with testing programs learn more than their counterparts in school systems without? An abundance of evidence demonstrates that they do. 


1242. Patrick Mattimore, (Fellow, Institute for Analytic Journalism), OP-ED NEWS, Feb. 5, 2009. Retrieved Dec. 10, 2014 from the Opposing Viewpoints Resource Center. Multiple choice tests are everywhere in America. They are the primary yardsticks in our K-12 assessments. Among other things, we use multiple choice tests for: college admissions; graduate school admissions; teacher licensing programs; licensing drivers, and; admission to professional practices, such as state bars [associations for practicing lawyers]. Multiple choice tests provide fast results, allowing teachers to provide immediate feedback and corrections. They are accurate, easy to administer and understand, objective, can be norm or criterion referenced, and most importantly, can test a variety of complexities of student knowledge. 
1243. Stephen Sireci, (Prof., Education, U. Massachusetts, Amherst), NERA 
RESEARCHER, Feb. 2007. Retrieved Dec. 10, 2014 from the Opposing Viewpoints Resource Center. I am a psychometrician working in educational measurement and so it is pretty obvious that I must believe in the usefulness of educational tests. However, my strong belief in the utility of educational tests stems not from my psychometric training, but from my experience as a parent. How do I know if my sons are receiving a good education? The class work, assignments, and report cards that come home give me some indication, but the norm-referenced and criterion-referenced test score reports give me a lot more to go on. The Iowa Tests of Basic Skills that our local school district uses allows me to compare my sons' performance to national norms. The Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS) tests allow me to see how my sons are doing with respect to the performance standards established by the State. Now, when my wife and I speak with their teachers or the principal, we can talk about these independent assessments, and how this information can be used to improve their instruction. 
1244. Stephen Sireci, (Prof., Education, U. Massachusetts, Amherst), NERA 
RESEARCHER, Feb. 2007. Retrieved Dec. 10, 2014 from the Opposing Viewpoints Resource Center. Why do federal legislators agree that mandated testing is an important part of education reform? There are several reasons. First, assessment is seen as a critical component in the educational process. In fact, quality education requires continuous interaction among instruction, curriculum, and assessment. Good instruction starts with good curricula and both influence each other. The development of curricula at the district and state levels is certainly influenced by what teachers teach in their classrooms. As the curricula are developed, teaching practices change accordingly. Assessments are needed to discover what students are learning. Based on that information, changes to instruction and curricula occur. 
1245. Stephen Sireci, (Prof., Education, U. Massachusetts, Amherst), NERA 
RESEARCHER, Feb. 2007. Retrieved Dec. 10, 2014 from the Opposing Viewpoints Resource Center. A third reason mandated testing is a key component of education reform is that it forces educators to align their instruction with state curriculum frameworks. No teacher likes to be overly constrained regarding what she or he should teach. However, no one wants teachers spending large amounts of instructional time teaching knowledge and skills that most would consider unimportant, relative to other skills. Thus, education involves consensus about what should be taught. The development of curriculum frameworks without a means for assessing how well students master the objectives within them would create a situation in which the good work done in developing the frameworks could be simply ignored. 
1246. Gary Ritter, (Prof., Education Policy, U. Arkansas), PHI DELTA KAPPAN, 
Mar. 2010, p. 50. Test-prep does not necessarily sap creativity, for teachers or students. Several teachers disagreed with the notion that testing forces teachers to replace creative lessons with dreary test-prep. One math teacher said, "I used to think and really had a strong opinion that it caused me not to be a creative teacher, but I've changed now." Another teacher -- one who was often critical of testing -- said that "true creative people" will "find a way to be creative regardless of what the framework is." When asked if tests discourage creativity, one teacher claimed that "I think it's done just the opposite ... I think adding open response where you used to have tests that were just strictly multiple-choice has forced teachers to be more 
creative." [ellipsis in original] 
1247. Gary Ritter, (Prof., Education Policy, U. Arkansas), PHI DELTA KAPPAN, 
Mar. 2010, p. 50. Before we walked into the schools, we anticipated a chorus of complaints confirming that testing, in and of itself, is a negative force, as is argued in some 90% of the literature we examined. What we found was surprising: While some teachers criticize testing for inhibiting creativity, most maintained that testing and standards spurred their creativity. Further, while one teacher claimed that she had to race through all of the Arkansas standards to be sure that everything was covered by the test date and that she had to abandon her former attitude of "stick with it until they got it," more teachers said that testing had forced them to make sure that every child understood the lessons. 
1248. Gary Ritter, (Prof., Education Policy, U. Arkansas), PHI DELTA KAPPAN, 
Mar. 2010, p. 50. Testing can lead to collaboration. Many teachers claimed that the Arkansas exams encouraged teacher collaboration to ensure that students are well- prepared. As one teacher said, testing "does give us a common goal, and we can work together." From a different school, a teacher asserted that "I feel like we have a lot more open policy teacher-to-teacher now because everybody's reaching for the best way.... It's just so worth it to collaborate with your other teachers on better ideas and 
seeing what they do that you can do better." [ellipsis in original] 
1249. Gary Ritter, (Prof., Education Policy, U. Arkansas), PHI DELTA KAPPAN, 
Mar. 2010, p. 50. Testing and standards help create a road map for the year's instruction. Many teachers noted that before testing, it was easy to teach idiosyncratically -- perhaps spending "six weeks on the dinosaur unit and just totally ignor[ing]" other topics. With increased focus on testing, however, teachers have focused on matching their instruction to a coherent set of standards. Thus, one math teacher said that while she had initially "hated" the Arkansas benchmark tests, she has since changed her mind: "I'm OK with it now, to be honest; I see where knowing the standards and knowing what's going to be tested can help me plan the whole year and make sure I've covered everything." One additional benefit of standardization -- a "lifesaver," as one teacher put it -- is that districts can collaborate in setting a consistent schedule for teaching the state standards, which means that "if a child moves from [neighboring town] to our school ... they should be right where we are." 
[ellipsis in original] 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	98 
 
 
 
1250. Linda Crocker, (Prof., Education, U. of Florida), DEFENDING STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 160. Standardized tests have become critical tools for decisions regarding college admission, college credits for high school work, graduate or school professional admission, and licensure for many blue-color and white-color professionals. Put simply, no one becomes a physician, lawyer, teacher, nurse, accountant, electrician, fire-fighter, cosmetologist, or real estate broker without taking a series of tests. Caring, effective teachers should want to prepare their students for these future testing situations. 
1251. Stephen Sireci, (Prof., Education, U. of Massachusetts at Amherst), 
DEFENDING STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 113. What is a standardized test? The term standardized test has quite possibly made more eyes glaze over than any other. Standardized tests have a bad reputation, but it is an undeserved one. People accuse standardized tests of being unfair, biased, and discriminatory. Believe it or not, standardized tests are actually designed to promote test fairness. Standardized simply means that the test content is equivalent across administrations and that the conditions under which the test is administered are the same for all test takers. Thus, standardized tests are designed to provide a level playing field. That is, all test takers are given the same test under the same conditions. 
1252. Stephen Sireci, (Prof., Education, U. of Massachusetts at Amherst), 
DEFENDING STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 113. If an assessment system uses tests that are not standardized, the system is likely to be unfair to many candidates. Those of you who had the pleasure of viewing the old film Monty Python and the Holy Grail saw an excellent example of a nonstandard assessment. In this film, a guardian protected a bridge by requiring that three questions be answered before a traveler was permitted to cross. Answering any question incorrectly resulted in being catapulted into the abyss. Thus, this was a high-stakes test. The three questions asked fo the first traveler were: What is your quest?, What do you seek?, and What is your favorite color? The second traveler was asked the same first two questions, but was then asked for the air speed velocity of a swallow. Clearly, the two assessments were not of equal content or difficulty. The second traveler who plummeted into the abyss had a legitimate claim of test bias. 
1253. Richard Phelps, (Ph.D., U. Pennsylvania & Director of Research and Strategic 
Resources, The Association of Boarding Schools), DEFENDING STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 87. A large number of testing researchers have insisted that there exists no, or hardly any, evidence that the use of standardized testing produces any benefits. Indeed, one group of (mostly education professors) hired by the National Research Council over a decade ago declared there was no evidence there were any benefits to the use of employment testing, despite the fact that over a thousand controlled experiments had been conducted finding that the benefits were pronounced and persistent. 
1254. Gregory Cizek, (Prof., Education, U. of North Carolina at Chapel Hill), 
DEFENDING STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 47. By accepted professional standards, we have better assessments than ever. I can't think of a large-scale, high- stakes test that doesn't have a reliability estimate near .90 or above, a bushel of content validity evidence, outstanding decision consistency indices, cut-scores that minimize false negative decisions, and multiple opportunities for students to take them. It's no exaggeration to say - especially compared to the tests a student will be exposed to all year in his or her classroom -- that a state-mandated student proficiency test is probably the highest quality test that the kid will see all year . . . maybe over 
his or her entire school career. [ellipsis in original] 
1255. Gregory Cizek, (Prof., Education, U. of North Carolina at Chapel Hill), 
DEFENDING STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 39. Equally certain, though, is that even rudimentary accountability systems would not likely be around if it weren't for high-stakes tests. For better or worse, high-stakes tests are often the foundation upon which accountability systems have been built. This is not to say that this relation between high-stakes tests and accountability is right, noble, inevitable, or appropriate. It simply recognizes the reality that current accountability systems were enabled by an antecedent: mandated, high-stakes student achievement tests. 
1256. Gregory Cizek, (Prof., Education, U. of North Carolina at Chapel Hill), 
DEFENDING STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 31-32. One assumption underlying high-stakes testing has received particularly scant attention: the need to make decisions. The only way to avoid many of the issues associated with high- stakes testing would be simply to avoid making any decisions at all. By definition, decision making creates categories. If, for example, some students graduate from high school and others do not, a categorical decision has been made, even if a graduation test was not used. The decisions were, presumably, made on some basis. High school music teachers make decisions such as who should be first chair for the clarinets. College faculties make decisions to tenure (or not) their colleagues. Virtually everyone concerned embraces decision making with regard to testing in fields where public protection or personal health and safety are of concern, such as medical licensure or board examinations required for the practice of medicine. All of these kinds of decisions are essentially unavoidable. 
1257. Gregory Cizek, (Prof., Education, U. of North Carolina at Chapel Hill), 
DEFENDING STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 37. Much research in the area of high-stakes testing and students at risk has provided evidence of this positive consequence of mandated testing. One recent example comes from the Consortium on Chicago School Research, which has monitored effects of that large, urban school district's high stakes testing and accountability program. There researchers found that students (particularly those who had some history of failure) reported that the introduction of accountability testing had induced their teachers to begin focusing more attention on them. Failure was no longer acceptable and there was a stake in 
helping all students succeed. In this case, necessity was the mother of intervention. 


1258. Don Hooper, (President, American Association of School Administrators), SCHOOL ADMINISTRATOR, Dec. 2001, p. 38. I have witnessed firsthand what an accountability system can do to raise the achievement and development levels for all -- and I do mean all -- students. My district, Fort Bend Independent School District, the state's 10th largest, is a Texas Education Agency "Recognized" school district. Our more than 56,000 students come from 25 countries and speak 65 different languages at home. We are very diverse. Since 1995 the passage rates in reading of our African American students increased from 67.6 percent passing to 88.1 percent. Hispanic students' passage rates rose from 69.3 percent to 85.7 percent. White students went from 91.9 percent to 97.4 percent passing, and our economically disadvantaged students' scores rose from 67.6 percent to 83 percent passing. Similar results have been achieved in mathematics and writing. Combined passage rates for all Fort Bend students tested in spring 2001 are as follows: reading, 92.7 percent; math, 92.5 percent; and writing, 91.8 percent. Ninety-three percent of our students are reading on grade level by 3rd grade. These are our Texas Assessment of Academic Skills test results. Additionally, our National Assessment of Educational Progress [NAEP] scores are up, and our increasing ACT and SAT scores surpass state and national averages. In addition, the percentage of Fort Bend students who take the college-entrance tests, including minority students, is among the highest in the country (85 percent). 
1259. Jonathan Zimmerman, (Prof., History, New York University), CHRISTIAN 
SCIENCE MONITOR, June 2, 2005. Retrieved Dec. 10, 2014 from Nexis. One of the main objections against standardized testing is that it discriminates against minorities, particularly black Americans and Latinos. Yet numerous public opinion surveys show that these minorities strongly support standardized testing. Black American and Latino parents favor discipline and strong curriculum in the classroom to raise standardized test scores, especially for students who live in violent neighborhoods and unstable homes. Nonetheless, despite these prevailing views among black Americans and Latinos, educational reformers and various organizations continue to argue that standardized testing hinders minority achievement. 
1260. Jonathan Zimmerman, (Prof., History, New York University), CHRISTIAN 
SCIENCE MONITOR, June 2, 2005. Retrieved Dec. 10, 2014 from Nexis. Over the past decade, public opinion surveys have demonstrated overwhelming support among racial minorities for high-stakes testing. In a 2003 study by the Pew Hispanic Center, for example, three-quarters of Latinos said that standardized tests "should be used to determine whether students are promoted or can graduate." Two-thirds agreed that the federal government "should require states to set strict performance standards for public schools," as mandated under President Bush's No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act. Likewise, African-Americans favor high-stakes tests by large margins. To be sure, activist groups like the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People have criticized NCLB and state graduation exams. But the black rank and file tell another story. According to a 1998 survey by Public Agenda, nearly 8 of 10 African-American parents want schools to test children and publicize black-white achievement differences, just as NCLB requires. Only 28 percent say that standardized tests are "culturally biased" against black children, as critics often maintain. Many of these critics work at schools of education, where the standardized test serves as a symbol of everything that's wrong with American teaching. 
1261. Kurt Geisinger, (Prof., Education, U. of St. Thomas), DEFENDING 
STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 198. Under ADA [Americans With Disabilities Act], individuals with disabilities must have tests administered to them with reasonable and appropriate accommodations. The number of types of reasonable test accommodations devised for persons with every variety of disability is itself almost overwhelming. 
1262. Kurt Geisinger, (Prof., Education, U. of St. Thomas), DEFENDING 
STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 199. A large variety of accommodations in testing format can be provided. Some accommodations are made in a group format; others are individualized, even for tests that are generally group administered. Test forms are provided in regular (standard) format, or with improved (or high resolution) type, large type, braille, or on audio-cassette. Time limits can be enforced, extended, or waived altogether. Test takers may be offered extra rest pauses, a reader, a recorder, a sign-language interpreter, a tape recorder to register answers, convenient test-taking locations and testing times, or other accommodations as needed to meet their particular requirements. Accessibility to the test site is a basic requirement for individuals with many kinds of disabilities. In extreme circumstances, changes in the abilities addressed and content covered in an examination may be required. 
1263. Linda Crocker, (Prof., Education, U. of Florida), DEFENDING 
STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 162. Currently, an emerging national trend in admission and licensure testing is for applicants to receive free access to test preparation and practice materials in electronic format (e.g. CD-ROMs or interactive websites) upon registration for tests to equalize access to preparation materials. 
1264. Dean Goodman, (Prof., Education, U. of Massachusetts at Amherst), 
DEFENDING STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 101. Test publishers and state departments of education are relentless in their search for potentially biased test items by reviewing items for potential gender, racial/ethnic, cultural, religious, regional, or socioeconomic disparities in understanding or performance. Consider the steps taken routinely by many testing agencies and state departments of education to remove bias from educational assessments: (1) Item writers who are members of multicultural and multiracial groups are among those who are used to write the assessment material - directions, questions, scoring rubrics, et cetera. (2) Item sensitivity committees representing diverse minority groups are established to focus on aspects of educational assessment material that might be unfair to minority students, or may represent stereotyping of minority groups. (3) Item reviewers, prior to any field testing of assessment material, are instructed to identify aspects of test items that might be unfair to minority groups or represent stereotyping. (4) Statistical analyses are carried out on field-test data searching for assessment material that is potentially problematic for minority groups. (5) All test publishers and most state departments of education have a document that is used by item sensitivity committees and other reviewers to spot potentially problematic or biased assessment material. (6) At the final stages of test and assessment development, content committees are sensitive to the inclusion of material that is not assessing the content standards or may be biased against minority groups. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	99 
 
 
 
1265. Dean Goodman, (Prof., Education, U. of Massachusetts at Amherst), DEFENDING STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 102. Clearly the amount of bias that is appearing on educational assessments is likely to be small because of the efforts that are being made to spot and eliminate problems early. There is simply little or no evidence to claim that item bias is a serious problem today on state assessments. 
1266. Gregory Cizek, (Prof., Education, U. of North Carolina at Chapel Hill), 
DEFENDING STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 41. Research has demonstrated that large-scale (e.g., state-level or school system-wide) testing accounts for less than 2 days per year per student on average. With the advent of No Child Left Behind regulations that every student in Grades 3 through 8 be tested annually in reading, mathematics, and science, that number of days will likely increase somewhat - particularly in states where testing in those grades and subjects had not been in place. However, it is also fair to say that one strains the gnat in objecting to the characteristics of high-stakes tests, when the characteristics of those tests are compared to what a child will likely experience in his or her classroom the other 178 days of the school year. All those genuinely committed to fair testing might appropriately refocus their attention on improving the quality of classroom assessment. 
1267. Gregory Cizek, (Prof., Education, U. of North Carolina at Chapel Hill), 
DEFENDING STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 42. A secondary benefit of high- stakes tests' quality is that, because of their perceived importance, they become mimicked at lower levels. It is appropriate to abhor testing to the test - at least if that phrase is taken to mean teaching the exact items that will appear on a test, or limiting instruction only to those objectives that are addressed on a high-stakes test. However, it is important to recognize the beneficial effects of exposing educators to high- quality writing prompts, document-based questions, constructed-response formats, and even challenging multiple-choice items. It is not cheating, but the highest form of praise when educators then rely on these exemplars to enhance their own assessment practices. 
1268. Gregory Cizek, (Prof., Education, U. of North Carolina at Chapel Hill), 
DEFENDING STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2005, 42. Finally, it is possible to align instruction with the curriculum guide, content standards, and so forth (depending on the terminology used to describe the valuable student outcomes in a particular locale). And, it is obviously desirable that any high-stakes test be closely aligned with the curriculum or content standards it purports to assess. Thus, it would neither be a coincidence - more inappropriate - if the well-aligned instruction and testing bore a strong resemblance to each other. This is sometimes mistakenly referred to as teaching to the test where the more accurate (and supportable) practice should probably be distinguished by use of a different descriptor, such as teaching to the standards or similar. 
1269. Jeffrey Penn, (Staff, New York Academy of Sciences), AT ISSUE: 
STANDARDIZED TESTING, 2008. Retrieved Dec. 10, 2014 from the Opposing Viewpoints Resource Center. "The College Board has been conducting an annual survey of college admissions directors for more than two decades," Camara said. Across the years, both four-year public and private institutions have consistently reported that high school grades are the most important factor in admission decisions and have always ranked it higher than scores from admission tests. According to Camara, the survey has shown a slight increase in the importance of admission tests at public institutions, which he said might reveal that admission directors are using the test scores as a corrective to grade inflation. He also rejected what he said were misleading claims by anti-testing groups that a growing number of colleges are dropping the SAT in their admission procedures. "Among four-year public institutions in the United States, 96 percent require an admission test today compared to 91 percent in 1979 and among four-year private institutions, 92 percent required admission tests, compared to 91 percent in 1979," Camara reported. Approximately 
3.2 million SAT I and SAT II tests were administered in academic year 2001-2. 
1270. Stephen Sireci, (Prof., Education, U. Massachusetts, Amherst), NERA 
RESEARCHER, Feb. 2007. Retrieved Dec. 10, 2014 from the Opposing Viewpoints Resource Center. A popular, but incorrect, myth is that educational [tests] are pushed by the extreme right of the political spectrum. This perception is simply false. Although the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) was proposed and signed by "he- who-must-not-be-named," [President George Bush] it was really an extension of [former president Bill] Clinton's Goals 2000: Educate America legislation, which was an extension of he-who-must-not-be-named's father's America 2000 legislation. Thus, educational reform and accountability movements involving testing are one of the few bipartisan areas of legislation we have seen over the past several decades. There are, of course, strong differences in educational policy between Democrats and Republicans, such as the financing of education, but it is important to note that the NCLB Act was sponsored by Democrat Ted Kennedy and Republican Judd Gregg in the Senate and Democrat George Miller and Republican John Boehner in the House. 
It passed overwhelmingly in both (87-10 in the Senate and 381-41 in the House). 
1271. John Camara, (Former Special Agent, U.S. Department of the Treasury), 
TERRORIST FINANCING SINCE 9/11: ASSESSING AN EVOLVING AL- QAEDA AND STATE SPONSORS OF TERRORISM, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, May 18, 2012, 13. If FinCEN is not able to successfully analyze the current 1 million BSA filings it receives annually it is highly doubtful that it will succeed with this new tasking. Yet law enforcement and intelligence professionals should have access to the data and be able to interpret it. Technology will be the force multiplier and the only realistic solution to effectively exploit current and new streams of financial data. 
1272. John Conyers, (U.S. Representative, Michigan), IRS TARGETING 
SCANDAL: THE NEED FOR A SPECIAL COUNSEL, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, July 30, 2014, 3. Two separate congressional Committees have sorted through more than half a million pages of documents, conducted 40 transcribed interviews, and held more than three dozen hearings and markups to examine the criteria used by the IRS to screen applicants for tax-exempt status. The Committees have not uncovered one shred of evidence to suggest that the involvement of senior officials of the Department of Justice, the Department of the Treasury or the White House itself. 


1273. Steven Miller, (Acting Commissioner, U.S. Internal Revenue Service), A REVIEW OF CRITERIA USED BY THE IRS TO IDENTIFY 501(c)(4) APPLICATIONS FOR GREATER SCRUTINY, Senate Finance Comm. Hrg., May 21, 2013, 8. Partisanship, or even the perception of partisanship, has no place at the IRS. It cannot even appear to be a consideration in determining the tax exemption of an organization. I do not believe that partisanship motivated the people who engaged in the practices described in the Treasury Inspector General's report. I have reviewed the Treasury Inspector General's report, and I believe its conclusions are consistent with that. I think that what happened here was that foolish mistakes were made by people trying to be more efficient in their workload selection. The listing described in the report, while intolerable, was a mistake and not an act of partisanship. 
1274. Neal Wolin, (U.S. Deputy Secretary of the Treasury), THE IRS: TARGETING 
AMERICANS FOR THEIR POLITICAL BELIEFS, House Oversight and Government Reform Comm. Hrg., May 22, 2013, 29. It is important in this context to make clear that Treasury's longstanding practice - spanning Republican and Democratic administrations - is not to involve itself in the details of the IRS's administration and enforcement of the nation's tax laws. It is critical that the nation's tax laws are administered and enforced in a way that neither involves political influence, nor the perception of political influence, This is particularly true with respect to decisions affecting specific taxpayers. That is how the process functions. 
That is how the process should function. And that is how the process functioned here. 
1275. Paul Rosenzweig, (Prof., Law, George Mason U.), STATE OF FEDERAL 
PRIVACY AND DATA SECURITY LAW: LAGGING BEHIND THE TIMES?, Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Comm. Hearing, July 31, 2012, 110. At the federal level, what protects anonymity are the statutory protections created by Congress. Some laws, like the Right to Financial Privacy Act (RFPA), create sector-specific privacy protections. Reacting to Miller, the RFPA prevents banks from willy-nilly providing financial data to the government, instead requiring the issuance of a subpoena and notice to a customer who has the right to object to the inquiry. Likewise, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Ace' has stringent rules regarding medical privacy and limiting the types of disclosures that doctors, hospitals, and insurers can make. 
1276. Neal Wolin, (U.S. Deputy Secretary of the Treasury), THE IRS: TARGETING 
AMERICANS FOR THEIR POLITICAL BELIEFS, House Oversight and Government Reform Comm. Hrg., May 22, 2013, 30. Over the past twelve days, President Obama and Secretary Lew have taken decisive action to address what happened at the IRS. The President named a new Acting Commissioner, and we charged him with holding responsible parties accountable and with taking immediate action to prevent these inexcusable acts from happening again. Treasury is committed to taking all measures to restore the public's confidence in the IRS. 
1277. John Koskinen, (Commissioner, Internal Revenue Service), EXAMINING 
THE IRS RESPONSE TO THE TARGETING SCANDAL, House Comm. on Oversight, Hrg., Mar. 26, 2014, 8. One of my primary responsibilities as IRS commissioner is to restore whatever public trust has been lost as a result of the management problems that came to light last year in regard to the application process for 501(c)(4) status. Taxpayers need to be confident that the IRS will treat them fairly no matter what their backgrounds, their affiliations, who they voted for in the last election. I am committed to ensuring we restore and maintain that trust. 
1278. John Koskinen, (Commissioner, Internal Revenue Service), EXAMINING 
THE IRS RESPONSE TO THE TARGETING SCANDAL, House Comm. on Oversight, Hrg., Mar. 26, 2014, 8. I am pleased to report to you that the IRS has made significant progress in addressing the issues and concerns with the 501(c)(4) determinations process. First of all, we have been responding to the recommendations made by the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration. It was the inspector general's report in May of last year that found applications for 501(c)(4) status had been screened using inappropriate criteria. As of late January of this year, we completed action on all nine of the inspector general's recommendations. Our actions have included reducing the inventory of 501(c)(4) applications, including the group of 145 cases in the so-called priority backlog, that is, those that were pending for more than 120 days on or before May 2013. As of this month, 126 of those cases have been closed, including 98 that were approved. Of those 98, 43 took advantage of a self-certification procedure re-offered last year. 
1279. Mateusz Karwowski, (Physician, Epidemic Intelligence Service, U.S. Centers 
for Disease Control), MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY WEEKLY REPORT, Dec. 
5, 2014, Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/]
pdf/wk/mm63e1205.pdf. Since early 2014, there have been more than 6,000 reported deaths from Ebola virus disease (Ebola), mostly in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone. 
On July 9, 2014, CDC activated its Emergency Operations Center for the Ebola outbreak response and formalized the consultation service it had been providing to assist state and local public health officials and health care providers evaluate persons in the United States thought to be at risk for Ebola. During July 9-November 15, CDC responded to clinical inquiries from public health officials and health care providers from 49 states and the District of Columbia regarding 650 persons thought to be at risk. Among these, 118 (18%) had initial signs or symptoms consistent with Ebola and epidemiologic risk factors placing them at risk for infection, thereby meeting the definition of persons under investigation (PUIs). 
1280. Alexandra M. Levitt, (Health Scientist, U.S. Centers for Disease Control), 
DEADLY OUTBREAKS: HOW MEDICAL DETECTIVES SAVE LIVES THREATENED BY KILLER PANDEMICS, EXOTIC VIRUSES, AND DRUG- RESISTANT PARASITES, 2013, xvi. Microbes can live in modern ventilation systems, travel to new continents by airplane, and contaminate centrally-processed food products shipped to stores and restaurants in different locations. Microbes also benefit from increasing urbanization, misuse of antibiotics, and increased opportunities to --jump‖ from animals to humans as more people use rain forests and other wilderness areas for settlement, agriculture, recreation, or tourism. Finally, as we learned during the anthrax incidents in 2001, human beings can deliberately spread pathogenic microbes as a weapon of warfare or terror. Terrorism aside, some of the greatest dangers from infectious disease we face today are from microbes that develop drug resistance - like tuberculosis or staph or strep bacteria - and from new microbes that emerge unexpectedly from animal reservoirs, like the viruses that cause AIDS, SARS, and pandemic influenza. Because these diseases are new, we do not always have tools to treat them or prevent their spread. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	100 
 
 
 
1281. Mateusz Karwowski, (Physician, Epidemic Intelligence Service, U.S. Centers for Disease Control), MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY WEEKLY REPORT, Dec. 5, 2014, Retrieved Jan. 15, 2015 from http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/wk/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/wk/]mm63e1205.pdf. The active monitoring program requires that all travelers from affected countries be monitored by local public health authorities for fever or other symptoms that might be early manifestations of Ebola for the duration of a 21-day incubation period. Symptomatic persons are referred and transported per protocols for Ebola for clinical evaluation to a predetermined hospital that is prepared to assess and care for a PUI [person under investigation], thereby minimizing the possibility of secondary transmission and ensuring prompt evaluation and early initiation of treatment. 
1282. Robert Litt, (General Counsel, Office of the Director of National Intelligence), 
IC ON THE RECORD, Mar. 17, 2014. Retrieved Feb. 8, 2015 from http://icontherecord.tumblr.com/post/79998577649/as-prepared-for-delivery-remarks- of- odni-general. Analysis of this information can help give policy makers early warning and deeper understanding of trends around the world. For example, just two weeks ago IARPA - the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity, which is 
basically the intelligence version of the better-known DARPA - reported that by 
monitoring publicly available information, it was able to identify outbreaks of disease as much as two weeks before they were reported in local media or by health agencies. 
1283. Margaret Hoppin, (JD, NYU School of Law), NEW YORK UNIVERSITY 
LAW REVIEW, Dec. 2012, 1954. First, the basic features of modern public health surveillance are not new; they were developed as responses to serious contagious disease. Second, public health surveillance in the United States has, in general, enabled interventions which - criticisms aside - have effectively addressed the public health crises they targeted. To give just one example, the surveillance and interventions conducted using New York City's nineteenth-century tuberculosis registry prevented the spread of tuberculosis. The program was accompanied by an impressive array of free services that helped to prevent and treat the disease. City and charitable organizations disinfected homes after a tubercular patient had moved or died, treated patients in facilities established across the City, created open-air programs for children and adults, and provided financial and logistical aid to tubercular patients. 
1284. Chris Babel, (CEO, TRUSTe), NEW TECHNOLOGIES AND 
INNOVATIONS IN THE MOBILE AND ONLINE SPACE, AND THE IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY, House Judiciary Comm. Hearing, June 19, 2012, 42. Today's companies are racing ahead to harness the aggregate power of vast databases of personal data. Personal data is a critical asset for businesses and leveraging that data can yield tangible benefits for both business and consumers. For example, by leveraging its clinical and cost data, Kaiser Permanente was able to attribute 27,000 deaths to Vioxx and pull the drug off the market. 
1285. Leon Gordis, (Prof., Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins U.), EPIDEMIOLOGY, 
2014, 39. An important element of this as well as other definitions of surveillance is providing decision-makers with guidance for developing and implementing the best strategies for programs for disease prevention and control. In order to enable countries or states to develop coordinated public health approaches, mechanisms for information exchange are essential. 
1286. Sheila Jackson Lee, (U.S. Representative, Texas), CYBER SIDE-EFFECTS: 
HOW SECURE IS THE PERSONAL INFORMATION ENTERED INTO THE FLAWED HEALTHCARE.GOV?, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Nov. 13, 2013, 7. There would be real problems if the Obamacare web registration site collected sensitive personal information on people registering for health care, but it does not collect sensitive personal information. 
1287. Sheila Jackson Lee, (U.S. Representative, Texas), CYBER SIDE-EFFECTS: 
HOW SECURE IS THE PERSONAL INFORMATION ENTERED INTO THE FLAWED HEALTHCARE.GOV?, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Nov. 13, 2013, 7. Most Americans who have take the time to visit the site and look at the information requested know that there is no highly sensitive or sensitive information collected for registering for health insurance. 
1288. Sheila Jackson Lee, (U.S. Representative, Texas), CYBER SIDE-EFFECTS: 
HOW SECURE IS THE PERSONAL INFORMATION ENTERED INTO THE FLAWED HEALTHCARE.GOV?, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Nov. 13, 2013, 7. We are not here today to talk about a data breach of the affordable care website, because they are not storing medical information nor are they storing the information registered on forms. I know this for a fact and not for dramatic effect - I went in search of the facts regarding the website and what problems it was 
experiencing. I found that there was not a problem with security of the website. 
1289. Eddie Johnson, (U.S. Representative, Texas), IS MY DATA ON 
HEALTHCARE.GOV SECURE?, House Science, Space, and Technology Comm. Hearing, Nov. 19, 2013, 10. So how vulnerable are our medical records on HealthCare.gov? Some, including two of the witnesses invited to testify today, have made public claims that the website will have all kinds of sensitive personal medical records in its database. That is simply not true. HealthCare.gov will not have patient or healthcare case information about anyone. 
1290. Yvette Clark, (U.S. Representative, New York), THE THREAT TO 
AMERICANS' PERSONAL INFORMATION: A LOOK INTO THE SECURITY AND RELIABILITY OF THE HEALTH EXCHANGE DATA HUB, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, Sept. 11, 2013, 5. HHS's Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) has a strong track record of preventing breaches involving the loss of personally identifiable information from cyber-attacks. This is due in large part to the establishment of an information security program with consistent risk management, security controls assessment, and security authorization processes for all enterprise systems. Our system and security protocols are grounded in statutes, guidelines and industry standards that ensure the security, privacy, and integrity of our systems and the data that flow through them. 


1291. Daniel Werfel, (Deputy Commissioner, U.S. Internal Revenue Service), EVALUATING PRIVACY, SECURITY, AND FRAUD CONCERNS WITH OBAMACARE'S INFORMATION SHARING APPARATUS, House Homeland Security Comm. Hearing, July 17, 2013, 22. The IRS is already well positioned to ensure the safety and security of the data being shared under the ACA, given the longstanding experience we have in overseeing the transmission of data to Federal and State agencies. 
1292. Diana Degette, (U.S. Representative, Colorado), HEALTH INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGIES: ADMINISTRATION PERSPECTIVES ON INNOVATION AND REGULATION, House Energy and Commerce Comm. Hearing, Mar. 21, 2013, 4. Earlier this week, the Premier Healthcare Alliance reported that 333 hospitals in their network had, since 2008, save $9.1 billion and avoided 92,000 deaths by implementing a set of patient-centered quality improvement reforms that was made possible in part by enhanced data-sharing and use of health information technology. 
1293. Willa Fields, (Prof., Nursing, San Diego State U.), IS --MEANINGFUL USE‖ 
DELIVERING MEANINGFUL RESULTS?: AN EXAMINATION OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY STANDARDS AND INTEROPERABILITY, House Science, Space, and Technology Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2012, 70. Additionally the RAND Study estimated that system-wide implementation of EHRs would eliminate 200,000 adverse drug events with Computerized Physician Order Entry, and avoid thousands of deaths by improving preventative care and chronic- disease management. 
1294. Hansen Clarke, (U.S. Representative, Michigan), IS --MEANINGFUL USE‖ 
DELIVERING MEANINGFUL RESULTS?: AN EXAMINATION OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY STANDARDS AND INTEROPERABILITY, House Science, Space, and Technology Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2012, 13. Studies have also shown that the use of EHRs has helped diabetic patients manage their disease more effectively - lowering their blood pressure, cholesterol, and glucose levels. In addition to improving the quality of care and health outcomes, estimates have shown that a fully interoperable health IT system could save the United States billions of dollars in health care costs each year. 
1295. Hansen Clarke, (U.S. Representative, Michigan), IS --MEANINGFUL USE‖ 
DELIVERING MEANINGFUL RESULTS?: AN EXAMINATION OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY STANDARDS AND INTEROPERABILITY, House Science, Space, and Technology Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2012, 13. The use of electronic health records - or EHRs - has real-world implications for the cost and quality of health care. Right now, a physician may order a duplicative test because previous test results from another hospital or doctor are not readily at hand, or they may miss a harmful drug interaction because a patient's full medication list is not available and the patient is not in a condition to provide that information. 
1296. Hansen Clarke, (U.S. Representative, Michigan), IS --MEANINGFUL USE‖ 
DELIVERING MEANINGFUL RESULTS?: AN EXAMINATION OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY STANDARDS AND INTEROPERABILITY, House Science, Space, and Technology Comm. Hearing, Nov. 14, 2012, 13. Increasing the adoption and use of health IT could help prevent some of the medical errors that injure at least 1.5 million Americans each year and lead to an estimated 98,000 deaths annually. For example, a study of a medical center in Arizona found that the use of EHRs reduced prescription errors by 88 percent and in a Florida health system the use of electronic reminders decreased the number of patient charts that were missing allergy information from 36 percent to 11 percent. 
1297. Maureen K. Ohlhausen, (Commissioner, U.S. Federal Trade Commission), 
THE NEED FOR PRIVACY PROTECTIONS: PERSPECTIVES FROM THE ADMINISTRATION AND THE FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION, Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Comm. Hearing, May 9, 2012, 52. There are a variety of statutes, such as HIPAA, the FCRA, and GrammLeach-Bliley, that govern the collection and use of consumers' financial and medical information in many circumstances, including over the Internet. 
1298. Michelle Gilman, (Prof., Law, U. Baltimore School of Law), BROOKLYN 
LAW REVIEW, Summer 2012, 1391. Welfare administration is highly devolved in that states and localities have great discretion in how they structure their welfare programs. So in another jurisdiction, Ms. Sanchez might have been subjected to drug tests or finger imaging or unsolicited family-planning advice, such as pressure to implant a Norplant birth control device. Throughout the country, poor women such as Ms. Sanchez face constant surveillance as they must comply with extreme verification requirements to establish eligibility for welfare benefits, travel to scattered offices to procure needed approvals, reappear in person at welfare offices at regular intervals to prove their ongoing eligibility and answer intrusive questions about their child rearing and intimate relationships. Further, under federal law, all jurisdictions engage in extensive data sharing with other government and private offices to ferret out fraudulent public assistance applications. 
1299. Bob Pfeiffer, (Dir., Federal Safety Net), WELFARE FRAUD, Apr. 30, 2015. 
Retrieved May 5, 2015 from http://federalsafetynet.com/welfare-fraud.html. Improper  [HYPERLINK: http://federalsafetynet.com/welfare-fraud.html]
welfare payments, including fraud, are estimated to be about 8.1% of all federal welfare payments made and totaled $50.8 billion in fiscal year 2013. This estimate is based on reports from the Office of Management and Budget(OMB). 
1300. Bob Pfeiffer, (Dir., Federal Safety Net), WELFARE FRAUD, Apr. 30, 2015. 
Retrieved May 5, 2015 from http://federalsafetynet.com/welfare-fraud.html. Total  [HYPERLINK: http://federalsafetynet.com/welfare-fraud.html]welfare improper payments and fraud of $50.8 billion is an enormous sum roughly equal to the total expenditures related to Child Nutrition, Head Start, Job Training, WIC, Child Care, LIHEAP and the Lifeline programs, combined. Explanations by OMB and GAO of the causes of improper payments are shown below by welfare program. In general, the high level of improper payments comes from the complexity and uniqueness of income qualifications in multiple welfare programs and the inability of federal agencies to fully police the complexities. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	101 
 
 
1301. Samuel Alexander, (Melbourne environmental programs lecturer), 	1306. Safa Motesharrei, (Maryland public policy professor), ECOLOGICAL SIMPLICITY INSTITUTE, 2014, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://simplicity  [HYPERLINK: http://simplicity/]	ECONOMICS, May 2014, retrieved April 19, 2015 from Science Direct. The 
institute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/The-Deep-Green-Alternative.pdf. 	The 	scenarios most closely reflecting the reality of our world today are found in the third 

relationship between energy and economics also becomes problematic in the context of climate change mitigation. Currently, fossil fuels make up over 80% of the global energy supply. If nations around the world choose to decarbonise economies in response to climate change, this may well imply an end to growth, or even significant economic contraction, because there are serious doubts about whether renewable energy will be able to fully replace the energy-dense fossil fuels in a timely or affordable way. This is not an argument against renewable energy, of course; the suggestion is merely that growth-orientated consumer societies could not be sustained if the world rapidly decarbonised to run solely or primarily on renewable sources of energy. A transition to 100% renewable energy, therefore, may well imply consuming significantly less energy, and in the highly developed regions of the world, energy descent would probably mean transitioning to some post-growth economic paradigm via a process of planned economic contraction, or degrowth. Kevin Anderson's work is particularly important here, for he is one of the only climate scientists who recognises (or is outspoken enough to say) that the world's shrinking carbon budget requires degrowth and reduced consumption in high consumption societies. That is not an implication many are prepared to accept, even amongst many or even most participants in the broad environmental movement. Indeed, this blindness - it might even be willful blindness - is arguably the environmental movement's greatest short- coming. 
1302. Richard Smith, (UCLA economics history PhD), TRUTH OUT, Jan. 9, 2014 
retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.truth-out.org/news/item/21060-green-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.truth-out.org/news/item/21060-green-]capitalism-the-god-that-failed. In 2005 the United Nations Millennium Ecosystem Assessment team of 1,300 scientists from 95 countries issued a landmark report on humanity's overconsumption of --nature's services.‖ The scientists reported that 60 percent (15 of 24) of the ecosystems examined that are critical for human survival are 
being --degraded or used unsustainably,‖ including fresh water, capture fisheries, 
coral reefs, wetlands, drylands and forests. Around the world, many of these are deteriorating or on the verge of collapse. Thus nature's ability to provide the resources for growing future populations is very much in doubt unless radical steps are taken soon. 
1303. Samuel Alexander, (Melbourne environmental programs lecturer), 
SIMPLICITY INSTITUTE, 2014, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://simplicity  [HYPERLINK: http://simplicity/]
group of experiments, where we introduced economic stratification. Under such conditions, we find that collapse is difficult to avoid, which helps to explain why economic stratification is one of the elements consistently found in past collapsed societies. Importantly, in the first of these unequal society scenarios, the solution appears to be on a sustainable path for quite a long time, but even using an optimal depletion rate and starting with a very small number of Elites, the Elites eventually consume too much, resulting in a famine among Commoners that eventually causes the collapse of society. It is important to note that this Type-L collapse is due to an inequality-induced famine that causes a loss of workers, rather than a collapse of Nature. Despite appearing initially to be the same as the sustainable optimal solution obtained in the absence of Elites, economic stratification changes the final result: Elites' consumption keeps growing until the society collapses. The Mayan collapse  -- in which population never recovered even though nature did recover --  is an example of a Type-L collapse, whereas the collapses in the Easter Island and the Fertile Crescent  -- where nature was depleted --  are examples of a Type-N collapse. 
1307. Nafeez Ahmed, (Institute for Policy Research & Development executive 
director), INFORMATION CLEARING HOUSE, Mar. 16, 2014 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.informationclearinghouse.info/article37971.htm. Another  [HYPERLINK: http://www.informationclearinghouse.info/article37971.htm]scenario focuses on the role of continued resource exploitation, finding that --with a larger depletion rate, the decline of the Commoners occurs faster, while the Elites are still thriving, but eventually the Commoners collapse completely, followed by the 
Elites.‖ In both scenarios, Elite wealth monopolies mean that they are buffered from 
the most --detrimental effects of the environmental collapse until much later than the Commoners‖, allowing them to --continue ‗business as usual' despite the impending catastrophe.‖ The same mechanism, they argue, could explain how --historical collapses were allowed to occur by elites who appear to be oblivious to the catastrophic trajectory (most clearly apparent in the Roman and Mayan cases).‖ Applying this lesson to our contemporary predicament, the study warns that: --While some members of society might raise the alarm that the system is moving towards an impending collapse and therefore advocate structural changes to society in order to 
avoid it, Elites and their supporters, who opposed making these changes, could point 
to the long sustainable trajectory ‗so far' in support of doing nothing.‖ 
1308. Safa Motesharrei, (Maryland public policy professor), ECOLOGICAL 

institute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/The-Deep-Green-Alternative.pdf. 	Wh i l e 	ECONOMICS, May 2014, retrieved April 19, 2015 from Science Direct. In order to 

passing over many matters of detail, this review has nevertheless outlined a wide variety of issues that, in the eyes of many observers, undermine the coherency of the 
growth paradigm. If once humankind lived on an ‗empty planet', where the benefits of growth clearly outweighed the costs, today it seems we live on a ‗full planet', where continued growth in the developed regions of the world, at least, is ecologically unsupportable, socially unjust, and arguably not even socially desirable from a ‗happiness' perspective. According to the latest reports from the Global Footprint Network, the global economy now exceeds the sustainable carrying capacity of the planet by 50 percent, causing a perfect storm of chronic ecological problems including climate change, biodiversity loss, resource depletion, topsoil 
erosion, deforestation, water shortages, and pollution. To make the environmental 
burden heavier still, the human population is set to reach nine or ten billion in coming decades. But despite this fact of gross ecological shoot - and despite the fact that technologies are not reducing the overall impact of the global economy - essentially all nations on the planet seek to grow their economies further, and without apparent limit. This is the growth paradigm, and it is in the process of colliding with biophysical reality. 
1304. Richard Smith, (UCLA economics history PhD), TRUTH OUT, Jan. 9, 2014 
retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.truth-out.org/news/item/21060-green-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.truth-out.org/news/item/21060-green-]capitalism-the-god-that-failed In its Living Planet Report 2010, the World Wide Fund 
for Nature (WWF) similarly concluded that people are plundering the world's 
resources at a rate that far outstrips the planet's capacity to sustain life. As of 2007, the world's 6 billion-plus people were using up 50 percent more natural resources per year than can be naturally regenerated (and many resources, like oil, cannot be replenished at all). Put another way, humanity's current --global footprint‖ is equal to 
1.5 planets. Under a business-as-usual scenario, even with modest projections for 
population growth, consumption and climate change, the UN predicts that by 2030 
humanity will need the capacity of two Earths to absorb CO2 waste and support natural resource consumption. Of course we don't all consume equally: The footprint of high-income countries is three times that of middle-income countries and five times that of low-income countries. Americans have the biggest footprint of all, consuming the most energy and producing the most waste. If everyone lived like Americans do, we would need 5.3 planets to support all this. James Leape, director general of WWF, says, --The implications are clear. Rich nations must find ways to live much more lightly on the Earth - to sharply reduce their footprint, in particular their reliance on fossil fuels. The rapidly growing emerging economies must also find a new model for growth - one that allows for them to improve the well-being of their 
citizens in ways the Earth can actually sustain.‖ 
1305. Nafeez Ahmed, (Institute for Policy Research & Development executive 
director), INFORMATION CLEARING HOUSE, Mar. 16, 2014 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.informationclearinghouse.info/article37971.htm. A [HYPERLINK: http://www.informationclearinghouse.info/article37971.htm] new study sponsored by Nasa's Goddard Space Flight Center has highlighted the prospect that global industrial civilization could collapse in coming decades due to unsustainable resource exploitation and increasingly unequal wealth distribution. Noting that warnings of ‗collapse' are often seen to be fringe or controversial, the study attempts to make sense of compelling historical data showing that --the process of rise-and- collapse is actually a recurrent cycle found throughout history.‖ Cases of severe 
civilizational disruption due to --precipitous collapse - often lasting centuries - have 
been quite common.‖ The research project is based on a new cross-disciplinary ‗Human And Nature DYnamical' (HANDY) model, led by applied mathematician Safa Motesharri of the US National Science Foundation-supported National Socio- Environmental Synthesis Center, in association with a team of natural and social scientists. The study based on the HANDY model has been accepted for publication in the peer-reviewed Elsevier journal, Ecological Economics. 
further understand what conditions are needed to avoid collapse, our first set of experiments model a society without economic stratification and start with parameter values that make it possible to reach a maximum carrying capacity. The results show that in the absence of Elites, if the depletion per capita is kept at the optimal level, the population grows smoothly and asymptotes the level of the maximum carrying capacity. This produces a soft-landing to equilibrium at the maximum sustainable population and production levels. Increasing the depletion factor slightly causes the system to oscillate, but still reach a sustainable equilibrium, although, importantly, at a lower carrying capacity. Population overshoots its carrying capacity, but since the overshoot is not by too much  -- of the order of the carrying capacity --  the population experiences smaller collapses that can cause it to oscillate and eventually converge to a sustainable equilibrium. Thus, while social disruption and deaths would occur, a total collapse is avoided. A further increase in the depletion factor makes the system experience oscillatory periods of growth, very large overshoots and devastating collapses that almost wipe out society, but the eventual recovery of Nature allows for the cycle to be repeated. 
1309. Ian Talley, (Wall Street Journal reporter), WALL STREET JOURNAL, April 
9, 2015 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.wsj.com/articles/global-economy-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.wsj.com/articles/global-economy-]
risks-long-period-of-low-growth-and-high-joblessness-imfs-lagarde-warns- 
1428591332. IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde said the global economy risks a protracted economic slowdown as policy makers fail to take appropriate action to spur output. --Today what we must do is avoid that [the] new mediocre becomes the ‗new reality,'‖ Ms. Lagarde said in a speech to the Atlantic Council ahead of next 
week's semiannual meetings of the IMF and World Bank. --All policy space and 
levers must be utilized,‖ she said. While global growth is running at roughly the average of the last three decades, Ms. Lagarde said that isn't enough to surmount stubbornly high jobless rates, hefty debt burdens and stagnating growth in several of the world's largest economies. 
1310. Ian Talley, (Wall Street Journal reporter), WALL STREET JOURNAL, April 
9, 2015 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.wsj.com/articles/global-economy-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.wsj.com/articles/global-economy-]
risks-long-period-of-low-growth-and-high-joblessness-imfs-lagarde-warns- 
1428591332. Gloomy global prospects, combined with a financial system still scarred 
from the 2008 crisis, aging labor forces and weakening productivity levels around the 
world, creates --a pretty toxic combination and we need to encourage policy makers to take the right decisions,‖ she said later on CNBC. Amid the weak growth outlook, Ms. Lagarde said financial risks to the global economy were rising, particularly amid a prolonged era of low-and in some cases negative-interest rates. 
1311. Eric Pianin, (Financial Times Washington editor), FINANCIAL TIMES, April 
15, 2015 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.thefiscaltimes.com/2015/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.thefiscaltimes.com/2015/]04/15/Here-s-Why-Global-Economic-Recovery-Could-Stall-Out. The latest update of the Brookings-Financial Times Tracking Indexes for the Global Economic Recovery highlighted the widespread problem of stagnant growth levels, risks of deflation and weak consumer and business confidence. --Barring three economies with sustained growth momentum - the U.S., United Kingdom and India - there are few others where short-term growth prospects look encouraging,‖ wrote Eswar Prasad, Karim Foda and Arnav Sahu. --Geopolitical uncertainties, ranging from the volatile negotiations between Greece and its euro zone counterparts to the tensions in Ukraine 
and the Middle East, continue to sap confidence.‖ 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	10 2 
 
 
 
1312. Eric Pianin, (Financial Times Washington editor), FINANCIAL TIMES, April 15, 2015 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.thefiscaltimes.com/2015/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.thefiscaltimes.com/2015/]04/15/Here-s-Why-Global-Economic-Recovery-Could-Stall-Out. The common thread among emerging market economies is slower GDP growth, declining consumer and business confidence, and weak export growth as external demand remains subdued and the falling euro and yen have reduced the competitiveness of emerging market exports. The four largest emerging and developing economies are Brazil, Russia, India and China, followed by South Korea, Mexico, Indonesia and Turkey. China's economy is facing a broad slowdown. Growth in industrial activity has slowed significantly, producer prices keep falling, and various other indicators of economic activity indicate a loss of momentum. --Still, the government has enough policy space to maintain growth at around 7 percent for the next couple of years,‖ the Brookings report said. 
1313. Eswar Prasad, (Cornell Dyson school professor), BROOKINGS, April 12, 
2015 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.brookings.edu/research/opinions/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.brookings.edu/research/opinions/]2015/04/12-global-economic-recovery-stall-prasad-foda-sahu. The main theme for 2015 seems to be that things could be worse rather than that better days are ahead. The urgency of structural reforms seems to have dissipated, with many economies relying on loose monetary policy and weak exchange rates to prop up growth and 
counter deflationary pressures. In the absence of a strong revival of domestic demand 
supported by a more balanced set of policies, a robust and sustained global economic recovery will remain elusive. 
1314. Samuel Alexander, (Melbourne environmental programs lecturer), 
SIMPLICITY INSTITUTE, 2014, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://simplicity  [HYPERLINK: http://simplicity/]institute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/The-Deep-Green-Alternative.pdf. Against this admittedly gloomy backdrop lies a heterogeneous tradition of critical theorists and activists promoting what could be called a ‗deep green' alternative to the growth- orientated, industrial economy. Ranging from the radical simplicity of Henry 
Thoreau, to the post-growth economics of the Club of Rome, and developing into 
contemporary expressions of radical reformism, eco-socialism, and eco-anarchism, this extremely diverse tradition nevertheless agrees that the nature of the existing system is inherently unsustainable. Tinkering with or softening its margins - that is, any attempt to give capitalism a ‗human face' - is not going to come close to addressing the problems we, the human species, are confronted with. What is needed, this tradition variously maintains, is a radically alternative way of living on the Earth 
- something ‗wholly other' to the ways of industrialization, consumerism, and 
limitless growth. However idealistic or Utopian their arguments might seem, the 
basic reasoning is that the nature of any solutions to current problems must honestly confront the magnitude of the overlapping crises, for else one risks serving the destructive forces one ostensibly opposes. 
1315. Joseph Tainter, (Utah State environment and society professor), DRILLING 
DOWN: THE GULF OIL DEBACLE AND OUR ENERGY DILEMMA, 2012, 48. Interestingly, the fundamental Hubbert cycle of the U.S. patent rate peaked in 1914, the year in which World War I broke out. The second major rate peak was in 1971, coinciding with the peak of U.S. oil production. The last and tallest peak of productivity occurred in 2004. Note that without a new cycle of inventions in something, the current cycles will expire by 2050. In other words, the productivity of U.S. innovation will decline dramatically in the next 20-30 years, with some of this decline possibly being forced by a steady decline of support for fundamental research and development. Each new complex addition to the already overwhelmingly complex social and scientific structures in the United States is less and less relevant, while costing additional resources and aggravation. Most of this complexity is apparent to the naked eye: look at the global banking and trading system, the healthcare system, the computer operating systems and software, military operations, or government structures. The scope of the problem is also obvious in the production pains of Boeing's 787 Dreamliner, and in the drilling of the BP Macondo well. 
1316. Richard Smith, (UCLA economics history PhD), TRUTH OUT, Jan. 9, 2014 
retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.truth-out.org/news/item/21060-green-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.truth-out.org/news/item/21060-green-]capitalism-the-god-that-failed. Global warming is surely the most urgent threat we face, but it is far from the only driver of global ecological collapse. For even if we switched to clean renewable electric power tomorrow, this would not stop the overconsumption of forests, fish, minerals, fresh water. It would not stop pollution or solve the garbage crisis or stop the changes in ocean chemistry. Indeed, the advent of cheap, clean energy could even accelerate these trends. Numerous credible scientific 
and environmental researchers back up what the climate scientists have been telling 
us, to demonstrate why perpetual growth is the road to collective social suicide. 
1317. Timan Santarius, (Berkeley visiting scholar), HEINRICH BÖLL 
FOUNDATION, October 2012, retrieved May 1, 2015 from https://www.boell. de/sites/default/files/WEB_121022_The_Rebound_Effect-_Green_Growth_Unravel ed_TSantarius_V101.pdf. A number of meta-studies now provide a summary and evaluation of the many individual empirical studies. It is from these that the present study derives the ‗fifty-fifty' rule of thumb: in the long term and on average, combined rebound effects of at least 50% must be assumed. In other words, energy 
efficiency improvements in an economic system will on average yield half the 
theoretical savings potential of efficiency technologies and measures, and in some cases the saving that is achieved will be even less than this. 
1318. Timan Santarius, (Berkeley visiting scholar), HEINRICH BÖLL 
FOUNDATION, October 2012, retrieved May 1, 2015 from https://www.boell. de/sites/default/files/WEB_121022_The_Rebound_Effect-_Green_Growth_Unravel ed_TSantarius_V101.pdf. This study for the first time addresses the question of the extent to which environmental policy measures can contain or even prevent rebound effects. Efficiency standards for appliances or production processes harbour the 
greatest risk of evoking rebound effects. Real income gains and falls in market prices 
that arise from efficiency increases can theoretically be absorbed by ecotaxes. However, this would require a complex taxation scheme with sector- and product- specific tax rates, which would be difficult to implement. In theory rebound effects cannot arise if resource use is limited by caps (absolute upper limits). However, unless caps are introduced globally, rebound effects can still occur via international trade and increased imports. 


1319. David Holmgren, (inventor of the Permaculture system for regenerative agriculture), SIMPLICITY INSTITUTE, 2013, retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
http://simplicityinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/CrashOnDemandSimplicity  [HYPERLINK: http://simplicityinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/CrashOnDemandSimplicity]
Institute.pdf. The fragility of the global economy has many unprecedented aspects that make some sort of rapid collapse of the global economy more likely. The capacity of central banks to repeat the massive stimulus mechanism in response to the 
2008 global financial crisis, has been greatly reduced, while the faith that underpins 
the global financial system has weakened, to say the least. Systems thinkers such as David Korowicz have argued that the inter-connected nature of the global economy, instantaneous communications and financial flows, --just in time‖ logistics, and extreme degrees of economic and technological specialization, have increased the chances of a large scale systemic failure, at the same time that they have mitigated (or at least reduced) the impact of more limited localized crises. 
1320. Danielle Kehl, (Open Technology Institute senior policy analyst), OPEN 
TECHNOLOGY INSTITUTE, Oct. 17, 2014 retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
https://www.newamerica.org/oti/nsa-surveillance-costs-and-the-crypto-debate/. The  [HYPERLINK: http://www.newamerica.org/oti/nsa-surveillance-costs-and-the-crypto-debate/]
impact on the U.S. tech sector was one of several key themes that emerged during the discussion in Palo Alto, the heart of Silicon Valley. All of the panelists agreed that the loss of trust as a result of NSA surveillance is damaging U.S. business interests, both at home and abroad. One big concern is the risk of Internet fragmentation because of data localization proposals that have emerged in a number of foreign governments, including Germany, Brazil, and India. Schmidt warned that if these proposals move forward, --the simplest outcome is we're going to end up breaking the Internet.‖ Passing the USA FREEDOM Act, increasing transparency around 
government requests for information, and promoting the use of encryption are 
immediate steps that can help mitigate the situation, but panelists emphasized that truly repairing the damage will take broader, long term reform efforts. 
1321. Danielle Kehl, (New America Open Technology Institute policy analyst), NEW 
AMERICA FOUNDATION, July 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]newamerica.org/downloads/Surveilance_Costs_Final.pdf. Given heightened concerns about the NSA's ability to access data stored by U.S. companies, it is no surprise that American companies offering cloud computing and webhosting services are among those experiencing the most acute economic fallout from NSA surveillance. Within just a few weeks of the first disclosures, reports began to emerge that American cloud 
computing companies like Dropbox and Amazon Web Services were starting to lose 
business to overseas competitors. The CEO of Artmotion, one of Switzerland's largest offshore hosting providers, reported in July 2013 that his company had seen a 45 percent jump in revenue since the first leaks, an early sign that the country's perceived neutrality and strong data and privacy protections could potentially be turned into a serious competitive advantage. Foreign companies are clearly poised to benefit from growing fears about the security ramifications of keeping data in the United States. In a survey of 300 British and Canadian businesses released by PEER 1 in January 2014, 25 percent of respondents indicated that they were moving data 
outside of the U.S. as a result of the NSA revelations. An overwhelming number of 
the companies surveyed indicated that security and data privacy were their top concerns, with 81 percent stating that they --want to know exactly where their data is being hosted.‖ Seventy percent were even willing to sacrifice performance in order to ensure that their data was protected. 
1322. Danielle Kehl, (New America Open Technology Institute policy analyst), NEW 
AMERICA FOUNDATION, July 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]newamerica.org/downloads/Surveilance_Costs_Final.pdf. Economic forecasts after the Snowden leaks have predicted significant, ongoing losses for the cloud- 
computing industry in the next few years. An August 2013 study by the Information 
Technology and Innovation Foundation (ITIF) estimated that revelations about the NSA's PRISM program could cost the American cloud computing industry $22 to 
$35 billion over the next three years. On the low end, the ITIF projection suggests 
that U.S. cloud computing providers would lose 10 percent of the foreign market share to European or Asian competitors, totaling in about $21.5 billion in losses; on the high-end, the $35 billion figure represents about 20 percent of the companies' foreign market share. Because the cloud computing industry is undergoing rapid growth right now -- a 2012 Gartner study predicted global spending on cloud computing would increase by 100 percent from 2012 to 2016, compared to a 3 percent overall growth rate in the tech industry as a whole -- vendors in this sector are particularly vulnerable to shifts in the market. Failing to recruit new customers or losing a competitive advantage due to exploitation by rival companies in other countries can quickly lead to a dwindling market share. The ITIF study further notes that --the percentage lost to foreign competitors could go higher if foreign governments enact protectionist trade barriers that effectively cut out U.S. providers,‖ citing early calls from German data protection authorities to suspend the U.S.-EU Safe Harbor program (which will be discussed at length in the next section). As the R Street Policy Study highlights, --Ironically, the NSA turned the competitive edge U.S. 
companies have in cloud computing into a liability, especially in Europe.‖ 
1323. Danielle Kehl, (New America Open Technology Institute policy analyst), NEW 
AMERICA FOUNDATION, July 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]
newamerica.org/downloads/Surveilance_Costs_Final.pdf. There is already significant 
evidence linking NSA surveillance to direct harm to U.S. economic interests. In November 2013, Cisco became one of the first companies to publicly discuss the impact of the NSA on its business, reporting that orders from China fell 18 percent and that its worldwide revenue would decline 8 to 10 percent in the fourth quarter, in part because of continued sales weakness in China. New orders in the developing world fell 12 percent in the third quarter, with the Brazilian market dropping roughly 25 percent of its Cisco sales. Although John Chambers, Cisco's CEO, was hesitant to blame all losses on the NSA, he acknowledged that it was likely a factor in declining Chinese sales and later admitted that he had never seen as fast a decline in an 
emerging market as the drop in China in late 2013. These numbers were also released 
before documents in May 2014 revealed that the NSA's Tailored Access Operations unit had intercepted network gear -- including Cisco routers -- being shipped to target organizations in order to covertly install implant firmware on them before they were delivered. In response, Chambers wrote in a letter to the Obama Administration that --if these allegations are true, these actions will undermine confidence in our industry 
and in the ability of technology companies to deliver products globally.‖ 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	10 3 
 
 
 
1324. Danielle Kehl, (New America Open Technology Institute policy analyst), NEW AMERICA FOUNDATION, July 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]newamerica.org/downloads/Surveilance_Costs_Final.pdf. It is abundantly clear that the NSA surveillance programs are currently having a serious, negative impact on the U.S. economy and threatening the future competitiveness of American technology companies. Not only are U.S. companies losing overseas sales and getting dropped from contracts with foreign companies and governments -- they are also watching their competitive advantage in fast-growing industries like cloud computing and webhosting disappear, opening the door for foreign companies who claim to offer --more secure‖ alternative products to poach their business. Industry efforts to increase transparency and accountability as well as concrete steps to promote better security by adopting encryption and other best practices are positive signs, but U.S. companies cannot solve this problem alone. --It's not blowing over,‖ said Microsoft General Counsel Brad Smith at a recent conference. --In June of 2014, it is clear it is getting worse, not better.‖ Without meaningful government reform and better oversight, concerns about the breadth of NSA surveillance could lead to permanent 
shifts in the global technology market and do lasting damage to the U.S. economy. 
1325. Danielle Kehl, (New America Open Technology Institute policy analyst), NEW 
AMERICA FOUNDATION, July 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]newamerica.org/downloads/Surveilance_Costs_Final.pdf. The NSA disclosures also threaten to upset existing U.S.-EU trade relationships. On the same day that the Data Protection Regulation and Directive passed, members of the European Parliament voted in favor of a resolution from the Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs 
Committee on the mass surveillance of EU citizens. Among other things, the 
resolution called for the suspension of the U.S.-EU --Safe Harbor‖ deal that lets American firms self-certify via the Commerce Department that they are in compliance with EU privacy laws. The actual authority to suspend the Safe Harbor agreement lies in the hands of the European Commission, but the Parliament's affirmative vote heightens concerns that restrictive proposals could move forward, which would directly threaten U.S. business interests. Over 3,000 American companies, including Facebook and Google, currently rely on the Safe Harbor framework to process data from European citizens without violating the continent's 
privacy laws. Yet both local and pan-European officials have become increasingly 
concerned that the Safe Harbor makes it easier for U.S. tech companies to sidestep the EU's stricter privacy protections, especially in light of revelations about the companies' compliance with the U.S. government under a number of the NSA programs. In June 2014, for example, the Irish courts referred a case to the European Court of Justice --questioning the adequacy of privacy protections for data transfers‖ under the Safe Harbor agreement. The Parliament's resolution also calls for the European Parliament to withhold consent for the final Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) and suspend the Terrorist Finance Tracking Program 
(TFTP) until the U.S. makes various related concessions. 
1326. Erin Kelly, (USA Today reporter), USA TODAY, Oct. 7, 2014 retrieved April 
19, 2015 from http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2014/10/07/wyden-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2014/10/07/wyden-]microsoft-tech-industry-privacy-encryption/16826657/. Wyden said Congress must act to rein in the NSA or risk losing high-paying American jobs in the tech industry. A report by the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation said U.S. tech companies stand to lose up to $35 billion through 2016 from canceled contracts and missed opportunities. In June, the German government announced it would cancel a contract with Verizon Communications because of the NSA's bulk collection of millions of phone records. The mass surveillance, which is still going on, came to 


1330. Enrico Moretti, (Berkeley economics professor), BAY AREA COUNCIL, December 2012, retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.bayareaeconomy.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.bayareaeconomy.org/]media/files/pdf/TechReport.pdf. The growing income generated by the high-tech sector and the strong employment growth that supports it are important contributors to regional economic development. This is illustrated by the local multiplier, which estimates that the creation of one job in the high-tech sector of a region is associated 
with the creation of 4.3 additional jobs in the local goods and services economy of the 
same region in the long run. That is more than three times the local multiplier for manufacturing, which at 1.4, is still quite high. 
1331. Enrico Moretti, (Berkeley economics professor), BAY AREA COUNCIL, 
December 2012, retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.bayareaeconomy.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.bayareaeconomy.org/]media/files/pdf/TechReport.pdf. As the innovative engine of the economy, the high- tech sector is responsible for a disproportionate share of productivity gains and national income growth. Income generation is reflected in employment wages, where a typical high-tech worker earns between 17 and 27 percent more than a comparable 
worker in another field. This income also makes high-tech an important source of 
support for local services jobs and economic development in communities throughout the country. 
1332. Enrico Moretti, (Berkeley economics professor), BAY AREA COUNCIL, 
December 2012, retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.bayareaeconomy.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.bayareaeconomy.org/]media/files/pdf/TechReport.pdf. As Figure 12 makes clear, the local multiplier effect for high-tech is large. For each job created in the local high-tech sector, approximately 4.3 jobs are created in the local non-tradable sector in the long run. These jobs could be for lawyers, dentists, schoolteachers, cooks or retail clerks. In 
short, the income generated by high-tech industries spurs a high rate of economic 
activity that supports local jobs. While also large, the local multiplier for the manufacturing sector is much smaller than the multiplier for high-tech. The creation of one job in manufacturing creates an estimated 1.4 additional jobs in the local non- tradable sector, about one-third as many as created by high-tech. 
1333. Associated Press, Dec. 30 2014 retrieved May 1, 2015 from 
http://www.cnbc.com/id/102300761. That [HYPERLINK: http://www.cnbc.com/id/102300761] pace will likely ease a bit. Still, the economy is expected to expand 3.1 percent next year, according to a survey by the National Association for Business Economics. It would be the first year of 3 percent growth since 2005. The acceleration of U.S. growth is a key reason the global 
economy is also expected to grow faster, at about 3 percent, up from 2.5 percent in 
2014, according to economists at JPMorgan Chase and IHS Global Insight. 
1334. Samuel Rines, (Chilton Capital Management economist), NATIONAL 
INTEREST, Jan. 5, 2015 retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://nationalinterest.  [HYPERLINK: http://nationalinterest/]
org/feature/2015-americas-economy-will-lead-the-world-the-wrong-reasons-11960. 
The United States will return to a leadership position in global economic growth in 2015, but for the wrong reasons: Global growth is going to disappoint, as the easy commodity-driven growth of emerging countries dries up, China struggles to hit its growth target and Europe and Japan's efforts to meet their inflation targets fall short. In essence, the U.S. economy will lead a weak world, not a robust recovery. At any rate, 2015 is setting up to be an interesting year for the global economy and, hopefully, one that sees many of these predictions not come true. 
1335. Christopher S. Rugaber, (Associated press writer), POUGHKEEPSIE 
JOURNAL, Jan. 3, 2015 retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.poughkeepsie 

light last year when former NSA contractor Edward Snowden leaked the information. 
journal.com/story/money/2015/01/03/world-economy-outlook/21239525/. 
The 

1327. Kristie Eshelman, (Watchdog opinion writer), WATCHDOG.ORG, Feb. 27, 
2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://watchdog.org/203022/nsa-surveillance-  [HYPERLINK: http://watchdog.org/203022/nsa-surveillance-]killing-u-s-tech-industry/. The United States has the potential to become an international leader in tech, and young people are flocking to the tech scene because they see the opportunity to revolutionize the way the world works. At a time when youth unemployment is at 14.2 percent, we need more jobs, not less. The U.S. tech industry is growing fast and has the potential to provide a lot of those jobs. The last thing young Americans need is for invasive NSA surveillance programs to stifle 
business overseas, limiting our ability to maximize our potential on a global scale. 
It's encouraging to see how much the tech scene has grown in the U.S. in the past few years, and we want to see that continue. 
1328. Harold Furchtgott-Roth, (Hudson Institute center for economics of the Internet 
director), HUDSON INSTITUTE, Aug. 13, 2014 retrieved May 1, 2015 from 
http://www.hudson.org/research/10545-the-contribution-of-the-information-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.hudson.org/research/10545-the-contribution-of-the-information-]
United States is back, and ready to drive global growth in 2015. After long struggling 
to claw its way out of the Great Recession, the world's biggest economy is on an extended winning streak that is edging it closer to full health. The U.S. economy is expected to expand 3.1 percent next year, according to a survey by the National 
Association for Business Economics. It would be the first year of 3 percent growth 
since 2005. 
1336. Rich Miller, (Bloomberg Business writer), BLOOMBERG, Jan. 9, 2015 
retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-01-09/u-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-01-09/u-]s-retakes-the-helm-of-the-global-economy. The U.S. is back in the driver's seat of the global economy after 15 years of watching China and emerging markets take the lead. The world's biggest economy will expand by 3.2 percent or more this year, its best performance since at least 2005, as an improving job market leads to stepped-up consumer spending, according to economists at JPMorgan Chase & Co., Deutsche 
Bank AG and BNP Paribas SA. That outcome would be about what each foresees for 
the world economy as a whole and would be the first time since 1999 that America 

communications-and-technology-sector-to-the-growth-of-u-s-economy-1997-2007. 
In 
hasn't lagged behind global growth, based on data from the International Monetary 

this paper, we identify the contribution of the information, communications, and technology sector to the economic growth of the United States. For the years 1997- 2002, we find the sector contributed 19% of measurable economic gross output growth, or more than 582 billion 2013 dollars. For the period 2002-2007, we find the sector contributed 9.3% of gross output growth, or more than 340 billion 2013 dollars. These contributions to economic growth are above the level of economic activity that would have occurred had economic factors remained constant. The ICT sector also contributed substantially to the economic growth of many American industries. 
1329. Enrico Moretti, (Berkeley economics professor), BAY AREA COUNCIL, 
December 2012, retrieved May 1 2015 from http://www.bayareaeconomy.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.bayareaeconomy.org/]media/files/pdf/TechReport.pdf. This study addresses an important question: how important is hightech employment growth for the U.S. labor market? As it turns out, the dynamism of the U.S. high-tech companies matters not just to scientists, software engineers and stock holders, but to the community at large. While the average worker 
may never be employed by Google or a hightech startup, our jobs are increasingly 
supported by the wealth created by innovators. The reason is that high-tech companies generate a growing number of jobs outside high-tech in the communities where they are located. My research shows that attracting a scientist or a software engineer to a city triggers a multiplier effect, increasing employment and salaries for those who provide local services. This study confirms and extends this finding using a broader definition of the high-tech sector. It is a useful contribution to our 
understanding of job creation in America today 
Fund. --The U.S. is again the engine of global growth,‖ said Allen Sinai, chief 
executive officer of Decision Economics in New York. --The economy is looking 
stellar and is in its best shape since the 1990s.‖ 
1337. International Strategic Analysis, Feb. 4, 2015 retrieved May 1, 2015 from 
http://www.isa-world.com/news/?tx_ttnews%5BbackPid%5D=1&tx_ttnews%5Btt_  [HYPERLINK: http://www.isa-world.com/news/?tx_ttnews%5BbackPid%5D=1&amp;tx_ttnews%5Btt_]
news%5D=67&cHash=c238a2e7966f3ea08a20dba4e759cf3a. The outlook for many 
of the world's other leading economies in 2015 makes it imperative that the US 
economy meet expectations this year. For example, Chinese economic growth rates are forecast to continue to trend downwards in 2015, with GDP growth rates forecast to fall to below 7% by the end of the year. Meanwhile, many of the world's other leading emerging markets (Brazil, Russia, etc.) are mired in deep slumps that are forecast to persist for at least another year. In the developed world, the Eurozone's combination of stagnation and deflation means that its long slump will continue in 2015 and likely much longer, while Japan's recovery has proven to be short-lived and stagnation and deflation could return to that country as well. As a result, the US consumer has returned as the key driver of global economic growth for the first time 
in more than 15 years, and this time, there are few other prospects to contribute to 
global growth. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	10 4 
 
 
 
1338. International Strategic Analysis, Feb. 4, 2015 retrieved May 1, 2015 from 
http://www.isa-world.com/news/?tx_ttnews%5BbackPid%5D=1&tx_ttnews%5Btt_  [HYPERLINK: http://www.isa-world.com/news/?tx_ttnews%5BbackPid%5D=1&amp;tx_ttnews%5Btt_]
news%5D=67&cHash=c238a2e7966f3ea08a20dba4e759cf3a. The most encouraging sign for the US economy, and for exporters around the world, is that consumer demand in the United States is on the rise and is forecast to continue to grow over the course of this year. With the unemployment rate in the US having fallen to just 5.6%, and with the sharp fall in oil prices providing a major bonus for US consumers, consumer demand in the US will rise at a very strong rate in 2015 after a prolonged slump in the wake of the financial crisis in 2008. This is encouraging, not only for the economic prospects of the United States, but for many of the world's leading export economies, particularly those in North America, East Asia and in parts of Europe. 
1339. Minq Li, (Utah economics professor), POLITICAL ECONOMY RESEARCH 
INSTITUTE, October 2012, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.peri. 
umass.edu/fileadmin/pdf/working_papers/working_papers_251-300/WP292.pdf. 
Historically, the western capitalist classes had managed to accommodate the working class challenge by providing a package of social reform. However, if the capitalist world system can no longer afford the social reform package for the comparatively 
small western working classes, there is little chance for it to offer and afford a similar 
package for the much larger non-western working classes. The historical social compromise between the western capitalist and working classes took place when global energy and natural resources remained abundant. By comparison, centuries of relentless global capital accumulation has by now exhausted the global ecological space. In the coming decades, if global capitalism fails to accommodate the growing demands of the non-western working classes while maintaining social peace in the core zone of the world system, then socialism as a global revolutionary project will be back on the historical agenda. 
1340. Samuel Alexander, (Melbourne environmental programs lecturer), 
SIMPLICITY INSTITUTE, 2014, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://simplicity  [HYPERLINK: http://simplicity/]institute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/The-Deep-Green-Alternative.pdf. Perhaps a more reliable path could be based on the possibility that, rather than imposing an alternative way of life on a society through sudden collapse, a deep crisis could provoke a social or political revolution in consciousness that opens up space for the deep green vision to be embraced and implemented as some form of crisis management strategy. Currently, there is insufficient social or political support for such an alternative, but perhaps a deep crisis will shake the world awake. Indeed, 
perhaps that is the only way to create the necessary mindset. After all, today we are 
hardly lacking in evidence on the need for radical change, suggesting that shock and response may be the form the transition takes, rather than it being induced through orderly, rational planning, whether from ‗top down' or ‗from below'. Again, this ‗non-ideal' pathway to a post-growth or post-industrial society could be built into the other strategies discussed above, adding some realism to strategies that might otherwise appear too Utopian. That is to say, it may be that only deep crisis will create the social support or political will needed for radical reformism, eco-socialism, or eco-anarchism to emerge as social or political movements capable of rapid transformation. Furthermore, it would be wise to keep an open and evolving mind 
regarding the best strategy to adopt, because the relative effectiveness of various 
strategies may change over time, depending on how forthcoming crises unfold. 
1341. Samuel Alexander, (Melbourne environmental programs lecturer), 
SIMPLICITY INSTITUTE, 2014, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://simplicity  [HYPERLINK: http://simplicity/]institute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/The-Deep-Green-Alternative.pdf. Despite the dominance of this growth model of progress around the world, it has never been without its critics, and as this paper will outline, there are reasons to think that grounds for opposition are growing in number, strength, and sophistication. It was the philosopher of science, Thomas Kuhn (1962), who argued that paradigm shifts in the 
natural sciences occur when the existing paradigm finds itself increasingly unable to 
solve the critical problems it sets for itself. As anomalies increase in number and severity, the need for an alternative paradigm becomes clearer, and eventually a new paradigm is developed that can solve more problems than the old one. At that stage a paradigm shift is set in motion, and over time the new paradigm becomes accepted and the old one loses its influence, sometimes quite abruptly. In much the same way, this paper proposes that a paradigm shift in macroeconomics is underway, with a post-growth economic framework threatening to resolve critical anomalies that seem irresolvable from within the existing growth paradigm. We will see that a growing 
array of theorists, from various disciplinary backgrounds, are questioning the 
feasibility and even the desirability of continuous growth, especially with respect to the most highly developed regions of the world. Increasingly there is a call to look ‗beyond growth', on the grounds that growth may now be causing the problems it was traditionally hoped to solve. Not only can it be argued that a post-growth paradigm shift is in progress, it seems the fundamental importance of this shift lies in the fact that it is in relation to progress. That is, it is changing the very nature of what ‗progress' means. 
1342. Erik Assadourian, (Worldwatch Institute senior fellow), WORLDWATCH 
INSTITUTE, 2012, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://blogs.worldwatch.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://blogs.worldwatch.org/]
sustainableprosperity/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/SOW12_chap_2.pdf. Degrowth in a globalized culture where growth is seen to be essential for economic success and societal well-being seems to be a political non-starter even for those who may be sympathetic. For most people, who deeply believe growth is essential to modern economics, it seems to be a recipe for economic and societal collapse. But the rapidly warming Earth and other declines in ecosystem services reveal that economic degrowth is essential and will need to be pursued as quickly as possible in order to stabilize Earth's climate and prevent irreparable harm to the planet and, in the process, human civilization. 


1343. David Holmgren, (inventor of the Permaculture system for regenerative agriculture), SIMPLICITY INSTITUTE, 2013, retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
http://simplicityinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/CrashOnDemandSimplicity  [HYPERLINK: http://simplicityinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/CrashOnDemandSimplicity]
Institute.pdf. While it may be too late for the Green Tech Scenario, it still may be possible to avoid more extreme climate change of a long drawn out Brown Tech Scenario before natural forcing factors lock humanity into the climate cooker of 4-6 
degrees and resource depletion leads to a collapse of the centralised Brown Tech 
governance and a rise of local war lords (Lifeboat Scenario). The novel structural vulnerabilities highlighted by David Korowicz, and the unprecedented extremity of the bubble economics highlighted by Nicole Foss suggest the strong tendencies towards a Brown Tech world could be short lived. Instead, severe global economic and societal collapse could switch off GGE enough to begin reversing climate change; in essence the Earth Steward scenario of recreated bioregional economies based on frugal agrarian resources and abundant salvage from the collapsed global economy and defunct national governance structures. 
1344. David Holmgren, (inventor of the Permaculture system for regenerative 
agriculture), SIMPLICITY INSTITUTE, 2013, retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
http://simplicityinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/CrashOnDemandSimplicity  [HYPERLINK: http://simplicityinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/CrashOnDemandSimplicity]
Institute.pdf. A collapse in credit could make it very difficult to raise the finance necessary for the ongoing extraction of tar sands, shale gas and other mad resource extraction projects that are accelerating the production of GGE [Greenhouse Gas Emissions]. A deflationary spiral that follows from a credit crisis and collapsing asset (housing, etc.) values could change behavior to the extent that people stop spending on anything but essentials because of job insecurity and the fact that everything will 
be cheaper next month. 
1345. David Holmgren, (inventor of the Permaculture system for regenerative 
agriculture), SIMPLICITY INSTITUTE, 2013, retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
http://simplicityinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/CrashOnDemandSimplicity  [HYPERLINK: http://simplicityinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/CrashOnDemandSimplicity]
Institute.pdf. If we accept a global financial crash could make it very difficult, if not impossible, to restart the global economy with anything other than drastically reduced emissions, then an argument can be mounted for putting effort into precipitating that crash, the crash of the financial system. Any such plan would of course invite being blamed for causing it when it happens. No one wants to be strung up along with the bankers for causing a global version of Greece, Egypt or many other countries, let 
alone the horrors of Syria. On the other hand, we have no precedent to indicate how 
bad conditions might be in currently affluent countries. 
1346. Ted Trainer, (New South Wales social sciences lecturer), BULLETIN OF 
ATOMIC SCIENTISTS, Nov. 4, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:http://thebulletin.org/why- 
consumer-society-cant-fix-climate. The fundamental cause of the global problems threatening humanity is a grossly unsustainable level of over-consumption. The per- capita rates at which people living in rich countries are using up resources are far beyond levels that can be kept up for long or that could be extended to all the world's 
nations. Yet most people fail to grasp the magnitude of the overshoot or its 
significance. The reductions required are so big that they cannot possibly be achieved within a consumer-capitalist society. Among the factors that policy makers are ignoring are standards of living, available land, carbon emissions, and economic growth. Living standards. Many resources are already alarmingly scarce, yet a minority of the world's people are currently using the majority of these resources. If the standard of living in countries such as Australia and the United States were to be extended to the entire world's population, which is expected to top 9 billion by 2050, production rates for most resources would have to be 7 to 10 times as great as they 
are now. Land availability. The per-capita area of productive land needed to supply 
one Australian with food, water, settlements, and energy is about seven hectares (or 17 acres), according to ecological footprint data published by the World Wildlife Federation in 2012. But when the world population reaches 9 billion, the per capita area of productive land available worldwide will be less than 0.8 hectare. In other words, the Australian --footprint‖ is already nine times as big as that which will be possible for all. 
1347. Samuel Alexander, (Melbourne environmental programs lecturer), 
SIMPLICITY INSTITUTE, 2014, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://simplicity  [HYPERLINK: http://simplicity/]
institute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/The-Deep-Green-Alternative.pdf. Consider 
the basic arithmetic of growth: if the GDP of developed nations were to grow by 3% per year in coming decades - which seems to be the benchmark for ‗success' - and by 2080 a global population of ten billion has achieved a similarly high material standard of living - which seems to be the goal of the global development agenda - then the global economy could be 40-60 times larger than it is today. Pause for a moment to dwell on those figures. Even allowing for significant uncertainty in these types of forecasts, and even assuming many efficiency improvements are implemented to reduce the resource intensity of each dollar of GDP, it is simply not credible to think that the planet's ecosystems could tolerate the global economy multiplying in size even two or three or four times, let alone forty or sixty times. Earth is struggling to absorb the impacts of the existing global economy, and despite decades of extraordinary technological advance, the ecological situation is getting worse, not better. It is very hard, therefore, to escape the conclusion that sustainability proper means that overdeveloped nations must enter a phase of significant degrowth in material and energy consumption, so that there is some ‗ecological room' for the poorest nations expand their economic capacities in order to provide basic needs for all. When that has been achieved, humanity must figure out a way to maintain a relatively ‗steady state' economy that operates within the 
sustainable carrying capacity of the planet. This alternative, post-growth vision of 
progress may sound idealistic - and in today's neoliberal political climate it certainly lies on the intellectual fringe - but in the long term one only ever hits what one aims for, and post-growth economics have a coherency that the vision of growth decidedly lacks. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	10 5 
 
 
 
1348. Dan Bednarz, (formerly with Pittsburgh Graduate school of public health), HEALTH AFTER OIL, Sept. 14, 2012 retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
https://healthafteroil.wordpress.com/2012/09/14/neoliberalism-degrowth-and-the- 
fate-of-health-systems/ Stated positively, degrowth allows humans to think and act cooperatively with nature as contraction occurs. It redefines neoliberalism as a virulent form of capitalism. Parenthetically, some argue all forms of capitalism are socially invidious and ecologically irrational; this is a discussion we cannot here develop, although we are adamant that perpetual economic expansion is no longer possible. While they do not (yet) share our social-ecological perspective, a small but growing number of health professionals in many nations are experiencing cognitive dissonance due to, on the one hand, their personal and professional commitment to treating illness and promoting health and, on the other hand, working under draconian and even life-threatening conditions created by austerity. Neoliberal politicians tell them to endure until normalcy returns, yet they see mass human tragedy unfolding in their work along side the coddling of elites -especially financers. 
1349. Dan Bednarz, (formerly with Pittsburgh Graduate school of public health), 
HEALTH AFTER OIL, Sept. 14, 2012 retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
https://healthafteroil.wordpress.com/2012/09/14/neoliberalism-degrowth-and-the- 
fate-of-health-systems/. It is important to contrast the situation of one nation, Iceland, which has rejected the neoliberal policy of austerity that in Greece, Italy, Ireland and Spain has been imposed to prop up --Zombie Banks‖ by transferring private banking 
losses onto the public. In 2011, --Icelanders . . . rejected the latest plan to repay the 
UK and Netherlands some 4bn euros lost when the country's banking system collapsed in 2008.‖ The UK and Netherlands governments were outraged by this plebiscite in which the Icelandic public refused to take on the debts of private Icelandic banks. As a consequence Iceland's health system, though it has problems, is 
not collapsing. [Ellipsis in original] 
1350. Mae-Wan Ho, (Catania biophysics professor), PERMA CULTURE NEWS, 
Sept. 18, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://permaculturenews.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://permaculturenews.org/]
2013/09/18/paradigm-shift-urgently-needed-in-agriculture-un-agencies-call-for-an- 
end-to-industrial-agriculture-food-system/. Local production and consumption would 
also greatly improve food safety, says Jutta Jaksche, Policy Officer of Food, Federation of German Consumer Organizations. Increasing globalization has accelerated the industrialization of agricultural practices. This has resulted in large scale production that, in the absence of effective regulation, will follow a --race to the bottom‖ in safety, environmental, social, and ethical standards. A case in point was the EHEC O104: H4, a deadly E. coli bacterium strain traced to imported contaminated sprouts that killed at least 45 people and caused a major food crisis in Germany in 2011. 
1351. Mae-Wan Ho, (Catania biophysics professor), PERMA CULTURE NEWS, 
Sept. 18, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://permaculturenews.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://permaculturenews.org/]
2013/09/18/paradigm-shift-urgently-needed-in-agriculture-un-agencies-call-for-an- 
end-to-industrial-agriculture-food-system/. Jean Feyder, Ambassador, and former permanent representation of Luxembourg to the UN and WTO in Geneva, is especially critical of the globalization of agricultural trade. He says adequate regulation of agricultural markets is needed to shield small producers from international competition and dumping of food imports. The financialization of agriculture  --  trading food commodities in the unregulated global financial market that many believe to have contributed to the 2008 world food crisis  --  is a new risk. 
Land-grabbing and financial speculation on food commodities continue to be a major 
cause of price surge and volatility witnessed over the past few years, not to mention the production of agro-fuels, which contribute little if at all to reducing CO2 emissions. Some scientists argue that when proper accounting is done, they actually increase CO2 emissions, even without taking into account land use change because nitrous oxide emissions from fertilizers have been greatly underestimated. 
1352. Nafeez Ahmed, (Institute for Policy Research & Development executive 
director), COUNTER CURRENTS, Nov. 20, 2012 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.countercurrents.org/ahmed201112.htm. This [HYPERLINK: http://www.countercurrents.org/ahmed201112.htm] new paradigm also applies to food. On the one hand, we need to put an end to the wasteful practices of the industrial food system, by which one third of global food production is lost or wasted every year. On the other, we must shift away from resource-intensive forms of traditional corporate-dominated agriculture. In many cases, we will find that smaller- scale forms of organic farming which are more labor intensive, though less energy and water intensive, can be more sustainable than current industrial practices. Communal organic farming offers immense potential not only for employment, but also for households to become local owners and producers in the existing food supply chain. In poorer countries, the UN Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food finds that small-scale organic methods could double food production. And a recent University of Michigan study concludes that no-pesticide, local forms of organic agriculture without artificial fertilizers, could theoretically be scaled up to sustain high nutritional requirements for the entire global population. This new paradigm of distributed clean energy production, decentralized farming, and participatory economic cooperation, offers a model of development free from the imperative of endless growth for its own sake; and it leads us directly to a new model of democracy, based not on large-scale, hierarchical-control, but on the wholesale decentralization of power, towards smaller, local ownership and decision-making. 
1353. Sophia Murphy, (IATP senior advisor), INSTITUTE FOR AGRICULTURE 
AND TRADE POLICY, February 2013, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]iatp.org/files/2013_02_14_LandGrabsFoodSystem_SM_0.pdf. The globalization of 
food production, distribution and finance played a central part in the food price crisis 
of 2007-08 and the subsequent period of high and volatile food commodity prices that still persists. Globalization as shaped by late 20th century trade and investment agreements fueled land grabs in two ways: it made land an attractive asset for increasingly global investors; and, it increased the risks, particularly for rich net-food importing countries, that international markets might fail to provide the food they depended on, pushing governments to look for other solutions to their food import needs. The food price crisis marked a watershed in our understanding of the world's food systems. It highlighted the flaws of relying on open markets alone to realize 
food security. International markets, though ostensibly more stable than domestic 
food markets because they can theoretically draw on the whole world's production for supply, lack key features of a stable system, including reserves as a hedge against bad harvests in the largest exporting regions. 


1354. Sophia Murphy, (IATP senior advisor), INSTITUTE FOR AGRICULTURE AND TRADE POLICY, February 2013, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]iatp.org/files/2013_02_14_LandGrabsFoodSystem_SM_0.pdf. The globalization of food systems has left agricultural supply and demand tightly aligned -- there are few supplies in storage, and there is therefore little or no slack when a harvest fails in a major exporting region or when demand rises sharply, as it did with the advent of 
biofuels from 2004. The expansion of the biofuels industry has also tightened the 
correlation between oil and agricultural commodity prices, creating new pricing signals that have little to do with food security or demand for food. The financialization of international agricultural markets has increased price volatility, making it harder for buyers and sellers to use commodity exchanges and other instruments to discover prices. Exponential growth in speculation on commodity markets is part of this financialization and has contributed materially to more volatile prices and less stable distribution systems, particularly imports for poor net-food importing countries. 
1355. Greg Cashman, (Salisbury professor), WHAT CAUSES WAR?: AN 
INTRODUCTION TO THEORIES OF INTERNATIONAL CONFLICT, 2014, 445. Goldstein's explanation for the link between K-waves and war is twofold First, increasing production produces a greater demand for resources, which in turn leads to international competition for these resources and to greater conflict over markets Second, this increased competition occurs during a period when production increases have made increased supplies of war materiel available to the military sector, drastically increasing the probability of war. The first argument is essentially a lateral pressure argument without the emphasis on population growth The second argument is essentially a resource theory of war -- wars are most likely when states have the resources to pursue them. War is most likely to occur, then, near the end of the long- wave upswing, when resources are most abundant. 
1356. Greg Cashman, (Salisbury professor), WHAT CAUSES WAR?: AN 
INTRODUCTION TO THEORIES OF INTERNATIONAL CONFLICT, 2014, 445. Goldstein initially argued that the hegemonic cycle and the economic long-wave cycle, though they are not in phase with each other, operate in conjunction Thus, hegemonic decline does not by itself lead to war. it is only dangerous when it coincides with an expansionary phase of the economic cycle Economic expansion by itself is not dangerous either, it must be accompanied by hegemonic stagnation. For example, the economic expansion of the 1960s was not associated with major wars because of the strong hegemonic position of the United Slates Goldstein (writing in 1988) predicted new economic upswings to coincide with the continuation of American hegemonic decline between 2000 and 2030. 
1357. Daniel Drezner, (Tufts IR professor), WORLD POLITICS, January 2014, 
retrieved April 19, 2015 from Proquest. The final significant outcome addresses a dog that hasn't barked: the effect of the Great Recession on cross-border conflict and violence. During the initial stages of the crisis, multiple analysts asserted that the financial crisis would lead states to increase their use of force as a tool for staying in power. They voiced genuine concern that the global economic downturn would lead to an increase in conflict -- whether through greater internal repression, diversionary wars, arms races, or a ratcheting up of great power conflict. Violence in the Middle East, border disputes in the South China Sea, and even the disruptions of the Occupy movement fueled impressions of a surge in global public disorder. The aggregate data suggest otherwise, however. The Institute for Economics and Peace has concluded that --the average level of peacefulness in 2012 is approximately the same as it was in 2007.‖ Interstate violence in particular has declined since the start of the financial crisis, as have military expenditures in most sampled countries. Other studies confirm that the Great Recession has not triggered any increase in violent conflict, as Lotta Themner and Peter Wallensteen conclude: --[T]he pattern is one of relative stability when we consider the trend for the past five years.‖ The secular decline in violence that started with the end of the Cold War has not been reversed. Rogers Brubaker observes that --the crisis has not to date generated the surge in protectionist 
nationalism or ethnic exclusion that might have been expected.‖ 
1358. Julian Cribb, (Sydney science communication professor), THE COMING 
FAMINE: THE GLOBAL FOOD CRISIS AND WHAT WE CAN DO TO AVOID IT, 2010, 10. The coming famine is planetary because it involves both the immediate effects of hunger on directly affected populations in heavily populated regions of the world in the next forty years -- and also the impacts of war, government failure, refugee crises, shortages, and food price spikes that will affect all human beings, no matter who they are or where they live. It is an emergency because unless it is solved, billions will experience great hardship, and not only in the poorer regions. Mike Murphy, one of the world's most progressive dairy farmers, with operations in Ireland, New Zealand, and North and South America, succinctly summed it all up: --Global warming gets all the publicity but the real imminent threat to the human race is starvation on a massive scale. Taking a 10-30 year view, I believe that food shortages, famine and huge social unrest are probably the greatest threat the human race has ever faced. I believe future food shortages are a far bigger world threat than 
global warming.‖ 
1359. Future Directions International, 2012, retrieved May 2, 2015 from 
http://www.futuredirections.org.au/workshop-papers/537-international-conflict-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.futuredirections.org.au/workshop-papers/537-international-conflict-]
triggers-and-potential-conflict-points-resulting-from-food-and-water-insecurity.html. There is a growing appreciation that the conflicts in the next century will most likely be fought over a lack of resources. Yet, in a sense, this is not new. Researchers point to the French and Russian revolutions as conflicts induced by a lack of food. More recently, Germany's World War Two efforts are said to have been inspired, at least in part, by its perceived need to gain access to more food. Yet the general sense among those that attended FDI's recent workshops, was that the scale of the problem in the 
future could be significantly greater as a result of population pressures, changing 
weather, urbanization, migration, loss of arable land and other farm inputs, and increased affluence in the developing world. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	10 6 
 
 
1360. Future Directions International, 2012, retrieved May 2, 2015 from 	1366. Suzanne Goldenberg, (Guardian US environment correspondent), http://www.futuredirections.org.au/workshop-papers/537-international-conflict-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.futuredirections.org.au/workshop-papers/537-international-conflict-]	GUARDIAN, March 30, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.the 
triggers-and-potential-conflict-points-resulting-from-food-and-water-insecurity.html. 	guardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/climate-change-food-supply-un. 	Climate 

He writes, -- . . . if people are hungry, especially in cities, the state is not stable - riots, 
violence, breakdown of law and order and migration result.‖ --Hunger feeds anarchy.‖ This view is also shared by Julian Cribb, who in his book, The Coming Famine, writes that if --large regions of the world run short of food, land or water in the decades that lie ahead, then wholesale, bloody wars are liable to follow.‖ He continues: --An increasingly credible scenario for World War 3 is not so much a confrontation of super powers and their allies, as a festering, self-perpetuating chain of resource conflicts.‖ He also says: --The wars of the 21st Century are less likely to be global conflicts with sharply defined sides and huge armies, than a scrappy mass of failed states, rebellions, civil strife, insurgencies, terrorism and genocides, sparked 
by bloody competition over dwindling resources.‖ [ellipsis in original] 
1361. Future Directions International, 2012, retrieved May 2, 2015 from 
http://www.futuredirections.org.au/workshop-papers/537-international-conflict-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.futuredirections.org.au/workshop-papers/537-international-conflict-]
triggers-and-potential-conflict-points-resulting-from-food-and-water-insecurity.html A study by the International Peace Research Institute indicates that where food security is an issue, it is more likely to result in some form of conflict. Darfur, Rwanda, Eritrea and the Balkans experienced such wars. Governments, especially in 
developed countries, are increasingly aware of this phenomenon. The UK Ministry of 
Defense, the CIA, the US Center for Strategic and International Studies and the Oslo Peace Research Institute, all identify famine as a potential trigger for conflicts and possibly even nuclear war. 
1362. David Holmgren, (inventor of the Permaculture system for regenerative 
agriculture), SIMPLICITY INSTITUTE, 2013, retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
http://simplicityinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/CrashOnDemandSimplicity  [HYPERLINK: http://simplicityinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/CrashOnDemandSimplicity]
Institute.pdf. For many decades I have felt that a collapse of the global economic systems might save humanity and many of our fellow species great suffering by 
happening sooner rather than later because the stakes keep rising and scale of the 
impacts are always worse by being postponed. An important influence in my thinking on the chances of such a collapse was the public speech given by President Ronald Reagan following the 1987 stock market crash. He said --there won't be an economic collapse, so long as people don't believe there will be an economic collapse‖ or words to that effect. I remember at the time thinking; fancy the most powerful person on the planet admitting that faith (of the populous) is the only thing that holds the financial system together. 
1363. Samuel Alexander, (Melbourne environmental programs lecturer), 
SIMPLICITY INSTITUTE, 2014, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://simplicity  [HYPERLINK: http://simplicity/]
change has already cut into the global food supply and is fuelling wars and natural 
disasters, but governments are unprepared to protect those most at risk, according to a report from the UN's climate science panel. The report is the first update in seven 
years from the UN's international panel of experts, which is charged with producing 
the definitive account of climate change. In that time, climate change has ceased to be a distant threat and made an impact much closer to home, the report's authors say. --It's about people now,‖ said Virginia Burkett, the chief scientist for global change at the US geological survey and one of the report's authors. --It's more relevant to the man on the street. It's more relevant to communities because the impacts are directly affecting people - not just butterflies and sea ice.‖ The scientists of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change found evidence of climate change far beyond thawing Arctic permafrost and crumbling coral reefs - --on all continents and 
across the oceans‖. 
1367. Doug Moss, (The Environmental Magazine editor), SCIENTIFIC 
AMERICAN, Nov. 10, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.scientific american.com/article/does-global-warming-make-food-less-nutritious/. Earlier this year, Myers and his colleagues released the results of a six year study examining the nutritional content of crops exposed to levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) that are expected to exist by mid-century. The conclusions were indeed troubling. They found that in wheat grains, zinc concentrations were down some 9.3 percent and iron concentrations were down by 5.1 percent across the seven different crop sites (in 
Australia, Japan and the U.S.) used in the study. The researchers also noted reduced 
protein levels in wheat and rice grains growing in the CO2-rich test environment. 
1368. Suzanne Goldenberg, (Guardian US environment correspondent), 
GUARDIAN, March 30, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.the guardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/climate-change-food-supply-un. The report explored a range of scenarios involving a temperature rise of two degrees or more that saw dramatic declines in production in the coming decades. Declines in crop yields will register first in drier and warmer parts of the world but as temperatures rise two, three or four degrees, they will affect everyone. In the more extreme scenarios, heat and water stress could reduce yields by 25% between 2030 and 2049. 
The report acknowledged that there were a few isolated areas where a longer growing 
season had been good for farming. But it played down the idea that there may be advantages to climate change as far as food production is concerned. Overall, the report said, --Negative impacts of climate change on crop yields have been more common than positive impacts.‖ Scientists and campaigners pointed to the finding as a defining feature of the report. 

institute.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/The-Deep-Green-Alternative.pdf. 	Could 

collapse or deep crisis be the most likely pathway to an alternative way of life? If it is, such a scenario must not be idealized or romanticized. Fundamental change through crisis would almost certainly involve great suffering for many, and quite possibly significant population decline through starvation, disease, or war. It is also possible that the ‗alternative system' that a crisis produces is equally or even more undesirable than the existing system. Nevertheless, it may be that this is the only way a post-growth or post-industrial way of life will ever arise. The Cuban oil crisis, prompted by the collapse of the USSR, provides one such example of a deep societal transition that arose not from a political or social movement, but from sheer force of circumstances. Almost overnight Cuba had a large proportion of its oil supply cut off, forcing the nation to move away from oil-dependent, industrialized modes of food production and instead take up local and organic systems - or perish. David Holmgren has recently published a deep and provocative essay, ‗Crash on Demand', exploring the idea that a relatively small anti-consumerist movement could be enough to destabilize the global economy which is already struggling. This presents one means of bringing an end to the status quo by inducing a voluntary crisis, without relying on a mass movement. Needless to say, should people adopt such a strategy, it 
would be imperative to ‗prefigure' the alternative society as far as possible too, not 
merely withdraw support from the existing society. 
1364. Erik Assadourian, (Worldwatch Institute senior fellow), WORLDWATCH 
INSTITUTE, 2012, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://blogs.worldwatch.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://blogs.worldwatch.org/]sustainableprosperity/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/SOW12_chap_2.pdf. Ultimately, overdeveloped countries (and overdeveloped populations within developing countries) will need to either proactively pursue a degrowth path or continue down the bro-ken path of growth until coasts flood, farmlands dry up, and other massive ecological changes force them away from growth into a mad dash for societal 
survival. If overdeveloped populations keep ignoring the looming changes -- keeping 
their proverbial heads buried in the sand -- then this transition will be brutal and painful. But if a strategy of degrowth, economic diversification, and support for the informal economy is pursued now, before most of societal energy and capital is focused on reacting to ecological shifts, these overdeveloped populations may discover a series of benefits to their own welfare, to their long-term security, and to Harth's well-being. 
1365. Richard Schiffman, (Atlantic Environ. writer), THE ATLANTIC, Sept. 27, 
2013 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/]
2013/09/leading-scientists-weigh-in-on-the-mother-of-all-climate-reports/280045/. 
For most climate experts, however, the battle is long over  --  at least when it comes to the science. What remains in dispute is not whether climate change is happening, but how fast things are going to get worse. There are some possibilities that are deliberately left out of the IPCC projections, because we simply don't have enough data yet to model them. Jason Box, a visiting scholar at the Byrd Polar Research Center told me in an email interview that: --The scary elephant in the closet is terrestrial and oceanic methane release triggered by warming.‖ The IPCC projections don't include the possibility  --  some scientists say likelihood  --  that huge quantities of methane (a greenhouse gas thirty times as potent as CO2) will eventually be 
released from thawing permafrost and undersea methane hydrate reserves. Box said 
that the threshhold --when humans lose control of potential management of the 
problem, may be sooner than expected.‖ 
1369. David Lobell, (Prof., Environ. Science, Stanford U.), ENVIRONMENTAL 
RESEARCH LETTERS, June 30, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from 
http://iopscience.iop.org/1748-9326/9/7/074003/pdf/1748-9326_9_7_074003.pdf.  [HYPERLINK: http://iopscience.iop.org/1748-9326/9/7/074003/pdf/1748-9326_9_7_074003.pdf]
The results of this study suggest that AGW has substantially increased the risks of 
major impacts in the near-term, with for instance a more than twenty fold increase in the chance of yield impacts of 10% or more over a 20 year period. We recognize that the numbers we compute are risk estimates that apply to our models' world. Both the accuracy of projections from climate models and the representativeness of these model ensembles when quantifying uncertainties has been amply discussed. Therefore we underline that the estimates shown are most valid in terms of comparative changes in likelihoods, rather than absolute changes. Consideration of both the effect of internal variability in the use of a large initial condition ensemble 
and that of model uncertainty in the use of multiple models makes our estimates of 
changes in risk robust, especially considering that we are limiting our horizon to the next few decades, while modeling uncertainties are known to affect more significantly long-term projections. 
1370. James Foley, (Nature World News reporter), NATURE WORLD NEWS, April 
11, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.natureworldnews.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.natureworldnews.com/]
articles/6598/20140411/historical-analysis-of-climate-change-supports-man-made- 
warming-with-99-9-certainty.htm. New historical climate analysis by a McGill University researcher indicates that climate change in the industrial era is man-made 
with --greater than 99.9 percent‖ certainty. Writing in the journal Climate Dynamics, 
McGill physicist Shaun Lovejoy reports his analysis of temperature data since the year 1500, concluding that global warming over the last century is not a result of natural long-term variations in temperature, but instead an anthropogenic effect. --This study will be a blow to any remaining climate-change deniers,‖ Lovejoy said in a statement. --Their two most convincing arguments - that the warming is natural in origin, and that the computer models are wrong - are either directly contradicted by 
this analysis, or simply do not apply to it.‖ 
1371. James Foley, (Nature World News reporter), NATURE WORLD NEWS, April 
11, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.natureworldnews.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.natureworldnews.com/]
articles/6598/20140411/historical-analysis-of-climate-change-supports-man-made- 
warming-with-99-9-certainty.htm. Lovejoy's approach did not rely on climate- simulating computer models, but a statistical analysis based on historical temperature records. The research employed a technique called --multi-proxy climate reconstructions‖ which are used to estimate historical temperatures. These climate reconstructions take into account data derived from tree rings, ice cores and lake sediments. The likelihood that global warming since 1880 is due to natural variability can be ruled out --with confidence levels greater than 99 percent, and most likely greater than 99.9 percent,‖ Lovejoy said. 
1372. James Foley, (Nature World News reporter), NATURE WORLD NEWS, April 
11, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.natureworldnews.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.natureworldnews.com/]
articles/6598/20140411/historical-analysis-of-climate-change-supports-man-made- 
warming-with-99-9-certainty.htm. Lovejoy's research falls in line with the recently released IPCC report on climate change. A doubling of carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere would cause warming between 2.5 and 4.2 degrees Celsius. The IPCC report predicted temperatures would rise by 1.5 to 4.5 degrees Celsius if CO2 concentrations double. --We've had a fluctuation in average temperature that's just huge since 1880 - on the order of about 0.9 degrees Celsius,‖ Lovejoy said. --This 
study shows that the odds of that being caused by natural fluctuations are less than 
one in a hundred and are likely to be less than one in a thousand. --While the statistical rejection of a hypothesis can't generally be used to conclude the truth of any specific alternative, in many cases - including this one - the rejection of one greatly enhances the credibility of the other,‖ he said. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	10 7 
 
 
 
1373. David Quammen (National Geographic award winning science writer), GUARDIAN, Sept. 29, 2012 retrieved April 29, 2015 from Lexis. Infectious disease is all around us. It's one of the basic processes that ecologists study, along with predation and competition. Predators are big beasts that eat their prey from outside. Pathogens (disease-causing agents, such as viruses) are small beasts that eat their prey from within. Although infectious disease can seem grisly and dreadful, under ordinary conditions, it's every bit as natural as what lions do to wildebeests and zebras. But conditions aren't always ordinary. Just as predators have their accustomed prey, so do pathogens. And just as a lion might occasionally depart from its normal behavior - to kill a cow instead of a wildebeest, or a human instead of a zebra - so a pathogen can shift to a new target. Aberrations occur. When a pathogen leaps from an animal into a person, and succeeds in establishing itself as an infectious presence, sometimes causing illness or death, the result is a zoonosis. It's a mildly technical term, zoonosis, unfamiliar to most people, but it helps clarify the biological complexities behind the ominous headlines about swine flu, bird flu, Sars, emerging diseases in general, and the threat of a global pandemic. It's a word of the future, destined for heavy use in the 21st century. 
1374. David Quammen (National Geographic award winning science writer), 
GUARDIAN, Sept. 29, 2012 retrieved April 29, 2015 from Lexis. In the case of Sars, the scenario could have been very much worse. Apart from the 2003 outbreak and the aftershock cases in early 2004, it hasn't recurred . . . so far. Eight thousand cases are relatively few for such an explosive infection; 774 people died, not 7 million. Several factors contributed to limiting the scope and impact of the outbreak, of which humanity's good luck was only one. Another was the speed and excellence of the laboratory diagnostics - finding the virus and identifying it. Still another was the brisk efficiency with which cases were isolated, contacts were traced and quarantine measures were instituted, first in southern China, then in Hong Kong, Singapore, Hanoi and Toronto. If the virus had arrived in a different sort of big city - more loosely governed, full of poor people, lacking first-rate medical institutions - it might 
have burned through a much larger segment of humanity. [ellipsis in original] 
1375. David Quammen, (National Geographic award winning science writer), 
GUARDIAN, Sept. 29, 2012 retrieved April 29, 2015 from Lexis. One further factor, possibly the most crucial, was inherent in the way Sars affects the human body: symptoms tend to appear in a person before, rather than after, that person becomes highly infectious. That allowed many Sars cases to be recognized, hospitalized and placed in isolation before they hit their peak of infectivity. With influenza and many other diseases, the order is reversed. That probably helped account for the scale of worldwide misery and death during the 1918-1919 influenza. And that infamous global pandemic occurred in the era before globalization. Everything nowadays moves around the planet faster, including viruses. When the Next Big One comes, it will likely conform to the same perverse pattern as the 1918 influenza: high infectivity preceding notable symptoms. That will help it move through cities and airports like an angel of death. 
1376. David Quammen, (National Geographic award winning science writer), 
GUARDIAN, Sept. 29, 2012 retrieved April 29, 2015 from Lexis. The Next Big One is a subject that disease scientists around the world often address. The most recent big one is Aids, of which the eventual total bigness cannot even be predicted - about 30 million deaths, 34 million living people infected, and with no end in sight. Fortunately, not every virus goes airborne from one host to another. If HIV-1 could, you and I might already be dead. If the rabies virus could, it would be the most horrific pathogen on the planet. The influenzas are well adapted for airborne transmission, which is why a new strain can circle the world within days. The Sars virus travels this route, too, or anyway by the respiratory droplets of sneezes and coughs - hanging in the air of a hotel corridor, moving through the cabin of an aeroplane - and that capacity, combined with its case fatality rate of almost 10%, is what made it so scary in 2003 to the people who understood it best. 
1377. David Quammen, (National Geographic award winning science writer), 
GUARDIAN, Sept. 29, 2012 retrieved April 29, 2015 from Lexis. --As long as H5N1 is out there in the world,‖ Webster told me, --there is the possibility of disaster. . . There is the theoretical possibility that it can acquire the ability to transmit human-to- human.‖ He paused. --And then God help us.‖ We're unique in the history of mammals. No other primate has ever weighed upon the planet to anything like the degree we do. In ecological terms, we are almost paradoxical: large-bodied and long- lived but grotesquely abundant. We are an outbreak. And here's the thing about outbreaks: they end. In some cases they end after many years, in others they end rather soon. In some cases they end gradually, in others they end with a crash. In certain cases, they end and recur and end again. Populations of tent caterpillars, for example, seem to rise steeply and fall sharply on a cycle of anywhere from five to 11 years. The crash endings are dramatic, and for a long while they seemed mysterious. What could account for such sudden and recurrent collapses? One possible factor is 
infectious disease, and viruses in particular. [ellipsis in original] 
1378. Science Daily, August 14, 2011 retrieved May 2, 2015 from 
http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2011/08/110811084513.htm. The [HYPERLINK: http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2011/08/110811084513.htm] biological diversity of organisms on Earth is not just something we enjoy when taking a walk through a blossoming meadow in spring; it is also the basis for countless products and services provided by nature, including food, building materials, and medicines as well as the self-purifying qualities of water and protection against erosion. These so-called 
ecosystem services are what makes Earth inhabitable for humans. They are based on 
ecological processes, such as photosynthesis, the production of biomass, or nutrient cycles. Since biodiversity is on the decline, both on a global and a local scale, researchers are asking the question as to what role the diversity of organisms plays in maintaining these ecological processes and thus in providing the ecosystem's vital products and services. 
1379. Science Daily, August 14, 2011 retrieved May 2, 2015 from 
http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2011/08/110811084513.htm. The [HYPERLINK: http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2011/08/110811084513.htm] more years, locations, ecosystem processes, and scenarios of global change - such as global 
warming or land use intensity - the experiments took into account, the more plant 
species were necessary to guarantee the functioning of the ecosystems. Moreover, other species were always necessary to keep the ecosystem processes running under the different combinations of influencing factors. These findings indicate that much more biodiversity is necessary to keep ecosystems functioning in a world that is changing ever faster. The protection of diversity is thus a crucial factor in maintaining Earth's life-support functions. 


1380. Harlan Grant Cohen, (Prof., Law U. Georgia), GEORGE WASHINGTON LAW REVIEW, Mar. 20, 2014 retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/]sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2412103. At this point, the Roberts' Court's distrust of the government and its associated turn to foreign affairs formalism look like durable trends. This resilience allows us to make some predictions about future Supreme Court opinions. Given the many moving parts in a given case as well as the dynamics of building five-person majorities, the end-result of a case is always uncertain. Nonetheless, the Court's demonstrated desire to rein other constitutional actors in suggests the type of cases that may be of interest over the next few years. As the Court reconsiders the trust it has long deposited with political branches in foreign affairs, longstanding functionalist doctrines designed to maximize political branch foreign affairs discretion should be subject to new scrutiny. 
1381. Harlan Grant Cohen, (Prof., Law U. Georgia), GEORGE WASHINGTON 
LAW REVIEW, Mar. 20, 2014 retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/]sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2412103. The first such case is already on the Court's docket. Zivotofsky v. Kerry (Zivotofsky Z/), to be decided this term, is already making its second appearance before the Court. As explained above, the case involves the conflict between a longstanding Slate Department policy requiring that 
the place of birth of Americans born in Jerusalem be recorded in their passport simply 
as --Jerusalem‖ and a Congressional act allowing Americans to opt to have --Israel‖ recorded there instead. Citing the President's long-recognized power to recognize foreign governments (derived from a functionalist reading of the Constitution's grant to the President of the power to --receive ambassadors‖), the Executive branch claimed authority to ignore the statute. Continuing to serve as an honest-broker in peace talks, the Executive explained, required the U.S. to express no opinion about Israeli or Palestinian sovereignly over the disputed city of Jerusalem. Forced to decide the case after the Court rejected its view that the case presented a non- justiciable political question, the D.C. Circuit agreed with Executive, finding the recognition power exclusive to the President. 
1382. Harlan Grant Cohen, (Prof., Law U. Georgia), GEORGE WASHINGTON 
LAW REVIEW, Mar. 20, 2014 retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/]sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2412103. It should hardly be surprising that the Court granted certiorari. The Court has said little beyond dicta in the past about the recognition power, leaving the President to claim broad, exclusive powers over anything related to recognition, claims to which lower courts have long deferred. But it is exactly those broad claims for deference, based on functionalist justifications for 
Presidential preeminence or even exclusivity in foreign affairs, that have now caught 
the Court's attention. Moreover, Zivotofsky II pits Presidential claims against Congressional actions, putting the case squarely in Youngstown Category 3. While prior Courts might have been open to the idea of powers exclusive to the President allowing him to override or ignore contrary Congressional action, the Roberts Court has not viewed Category 3 that way. On the contrary, Hamdan and Medellin suggest a more formal rule that Presidential action in Category 3 is simply forbidden. We will have to wait to see what this Court actually does with this case, but it should not be surprising if it second-guesses the Executive's claims about the dangerousness of passport designations and attempts to define limits on the recognition power. 
1383. Amy Howe, (SCOTUS Blog reporter) SCOTUS BLOG, Nov. 4, 2014 retrieved 
April 16, 2015 from http://www.scotusblog.com/2014/11/jerusalem-passport-case-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.scotusblog.com/2014/11/jerusalem-passport-case-]divides-court-in-plain-english/. Justice Anthony Kennedy, who often proves to be the deciding vote in closely divided cases, could play that role again here, and he was harder to read. On the one hand, he suggested to Lewin that, if the Court were to defer to the government's contention that listing --Israel‖ as the birthplace of U.S. citizens born in Jerusalem amounted to recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, the government's position would trump the law. On the other hand, he asked Verrilli why the State Department couldn't comply with the law and list --Israel‖ as 
the birthplace of U.S. citizens like Zivotofsky, but at the same time put a disclaimer 
inside the passport to make clear that the designation did not reflect the position of the State Department or --an indication that Israel . . . had jurisdiction over 
Jerusalem.‖ [ellipsis in original] 
1384. Lyle Denniston, (SCOTUSBlog reporter), SCOTUS BLOG, Nov. 3, 2014 
retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.scotusblog.com/2014/11/argument-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.scotusblog.com/2014/11/argument-]analysis-playing-diplomat-for-a-day/. It was quite difficult on Monday to remember that the Supreme Court has serious doubts about its own competence in the field of foreign relations. Justice after Justice, sort of playing --diplomat for a day,‖ had 
suggestions on how the federal government might try to avoid what it considers 
would be a serious embarrassment in Mideast policy. The most intriguing, as the Court heard the case of Zivotofsky v. Kerry, came from Justice Anthony M. Kennedy who  --  once again  --  might well hold the deciding vote on the outcome of a major constitutional clash between Congress and the presidency. A simple official disclaimer of what message a passport does not convey might be the answer, Kennedy suggested. 
1385. Peter Spiro, (Temple international law professor), OPINIO JURIS, Oct. 31, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://opiniojuris.org/2014/10/31/three-reasons-  [HYPERLINK: http://opiniojuris.org/2014/10/31/three-reasons-]
jerusalem-passport-statute-survives-zivotofsky/. The government lacks the amicus 
support one has come to expect in a case like this. Where is the brief from former 
U.S. diplomats? In Medellin, Madeleine Albright et al. argued that the failure to find 
the VCCR self-executing would do serious damage to US foreign relations. There's no equivalent in Zivotofsky, in circumstances in which the risk of damage would seem an order of magnitude higher (in the end, US-Mexico relations survived Medellin's execution, and there have been no reported cases of other countries violating US citizen rights under the VCCR). The silence from other quarters might make the justices feel a little more confident that upholding the statute is not going to spark riots in the Arab world. 
1386. Peter Spiro, (Temple international law professor), OPINIO JURIS, Oct. 31, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://opiniojuris.org/2014/10/31/three-reasons-  [HYPERLINK: http://opiniojuris.org/2014/10/31/three-reasons-]jerusalem-passport-statute-survives-zivotofsky/. Why would the Court have taken the case, except to reverse? If the Court were inclined to strike the statute down, letting 
the D.C. Circuit's creditable ruling stand would have accomplished that objective in a 
low-profile, low-cost way. The doctrinal math for sustaining the statute is straightforward. The Secretary's action is readily framed as Youngstown category 3 (much more so than the presidential memo in Medellin). From there, it's a simple matter of finding Congress to have authority over the issuance of passports. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	10 8 
 
 
 
1387. Peter Spiro, (Temple international law professor), OPINIO JURIS, Oct. 31, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://opiniojuris.org/2014/10/31/three-reasons-  [HYPERLINK: http://opiniojuris.org/2014/10/31/three-reasons-]jerusalem-passport-statute-survives-zivotofsky/. Assuming it doesn't ignite the Arab Street, the decision won't be of immediate consequence. Recognition decisions are much less important than they once were, and the probability of serious splits between Congress and the White House slighter still (hence the relative paucity of recent historical precedent for the issue). Ditto for passport authority parameters. This just isn't something that gets fought over very often. Because the result looks unthreatening in these ways, I don't see the Court going through Article I gymnastics to carve out this particular aspect of passport issuance from what is otherwise clearly within congressional authority (that is, some general authority over the issuance of passports under the foreign commerce and naturalization clauses). The Article I argument sounds more like a hairsplitty Breyer dissent than a broadly reasoned Roberts majority. 
1388. Peter Spiro, (Temple international law professor), OPINIO JURIS, Oct. 31, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://opiniojuris.org/2014/10/31/three-reasons-  [HYPERLINK: http://opiniojuris.org/2014/10/31/three-reasons-]jerusalem-passport-statute-survives-zivotofsky/. Upholding the statute would fit nicely into the Court's project of normalizing foreign relations law. Zivotofsky I was a key step in that agenda, playing the Marbury card against the conventionally deployed political question doctrine in this kind of foreign relations dispute. Medellin 
was another. Upholding the statute would be normalizing. Exclusive presidential 
powers are exceptional; they seem less amenable to judicial supervision, especially when they are located in an amorphous and historically uncabined foreign relations power. 
1389. Ingrid Wuerth, (Vanderbilt law professor), LAWFARE, May 12, 2014 
retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/05/chief-justice-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/05/chief-justice-]
roberts-not-yet-the-most-important-author-of-foreign-relations-opinions-in-the- 
history-of-the-supreme-court/. Several factors suggest that Chief Justice Roberts' opinions might have lasting significance for foreign relations law that rivals or even 
surpasses that of Jackson, Marshall, or Sutherland - while acknowledging that such 
evaluations are inevitably somewhat subjective. First, Roberts' tenure on the Court will likely be long, like that of Chief Justice Marshall, affording him many opportunities to shape this topic. Second and more significantly, his opinions  --  especially Zivotofsky v. Clinton and Medellin v. Texas - have already laid the groundwork for a distinctive foreign relations jurisprudence characterized by 1) judicial engagement with questions about the separation of powers between the Executive Branch and Congress and 2) waning deference to the Executive Branch (even under a Republican administration), except when statutory authorization is 
clear. The recent cert grant in Zivitofksy v. Kerry is likely, for example, to generate 
one of the Court's rare constitutional decisions on separation of powers in foreign relations law. Medellin was notable in part for putting the actions of the Executive Branch (led by President George W. Bush) in Youngstown category III - arguably the first time a majority of the Court has explicitly done so - and for the separation of powers decision that resulted. Even if the Executive Branch ultimately wins in Zivitofksy v. Kerry (which it may) the Court has unequivocally signaled a more muscular, hands-on approach to foreign relations cases, over the consistent objection of the Executive Branch. 
1390. Amy Howe, (SCOTUS Blog reporter) SCOTUS BLOG, Nov. 4, 2014 retrieved 
April 16, 2015 from http://www.scotusblog.com/2014/11/jerusalem-passport-case-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.scotusblog.com/2014/11/jerusalem-passport-case-]divides-court-in-plain-english/. After an hour of oral argument, the case appeared to be a close one. It ended on a somber note, with Justice Kagan noting that --history suggests that everything is a big deal with respect to the status of Jerusalem. And right now,‖ she continued, --Jerusalem is a tinderbox because of issues about the status of and access to a particularly holy site there. And so . . . everything matters, doesn't it?‖ Whether Kagan's words will ultimately sway at least four other Justices, and the extent to which its ruling will ultimately matter, remains to be seen. [ellipsis 
in original] 
1391. Cara Grand, (Duke Law JD candidate), DUKE JOURNAL OF 
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW & PUBLIC POLICY SIDEBAR, Feb. 4, 2015 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article  [HYPERLINK: http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article]=1118&context=djclpp_sidebar. Conclusion: Zivotofsky presents a unique dilemma to the Supreme Court in that it will force it to define, for the first time, the boundaries of legislative and executive power in matters of foreign recognition. Ambiguities in dicta and a stark absence of analogous historical examples will prevent the Court from drawing upon the security of well-established precedent and venerated pillars of constitutional interpretation. Instead, the Supreme Court will have to fulfill its ultimate role in examining what relationship, if any, the Constitution envisioned between these two branches in regard to foreign affairs, and what historical practice has suggested the future should hold for the implementation of so many crucial United States recognition decisions. 
1392. Chris Edelson, (Prof., Gov., American U.), NATIONAL CONSTITUTION 
CENTER, Nov. 21, 2014, retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://blog.constitution  [HYPERLINK: http://blog.constitution/]center.org/2014/11/zivotofsky-and-the-integrity-of-the-supreme-court/. In Curtiss- Wright (a case that did not actually involve any unilateral presidential action), Justice Sutherland declared that: --It is important to bear in mind that we are here dealing not 
alone with an authority vested in the President by an exertion of legislative power, 
but with such an authority plus the very delicate, plenary and exclusive power of the President as the sole organ of the federal government in the field of international relations  --  a power which does not require as a basis for its exercise an act of Congress‖. Justice Sutherland claimed that this description of presidential control over foreign affairs had a pedigree that could be traced back to a speech John Marshall gave in 1800. 


1393 Chris Edelson, (Prof., Gov., American U.), NATIONAL CONSTITUTION CENTER, Nov. 21, 2014, retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://blog.constitution  [HYPERLINK: http://blog.constitution/]center.org/2014/11/zivotofsky-and-the-integrity-of-the-supreme-court/. The Supreme Court has a golden opportunity to put this all to rest. The government cited Curtiss- Wright and the sole organ doctrine extensively in its brief to the Court, and the D.C. Circuit cited that case five times in its decision in favor of the executive. In an amicus 
brief, constitutional scholar Louis Fisher urged the Court to take this opportunity --to 
correct the erroneous dicta that appear in Curtiss-Wright.‖ The current members of the Court did not get it wrong in Curtiss-Wright, a case decided long before they joined the Court. But they have an opportunity and a responsibility to get it right now by making clear, once and for all, that the sole organ doctrine described in Curtiss- Wright is wrong. If they fail to do so with the question squarely presented to them, the message they send will be that getting clear questions of constitutional meaning correct is not essential to the Court's function. 
1394. Ashley Deeks, (Virginia law professor), FORDHAM LAW REVIEW, Oct. 10, 
2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm]
abstract_id=2338667. Courts are sensitive to the reputational costs of deciding controversial cases -- and cases involving wartime or emergency policies are particularly likely to be controversial. Many scholars have highlighted the institutional costs of deciding such cases. Judicial decisions on the merits force courts to bear certain reputational costs. The operation of the observer effect means that courts need to decide fewer such cases (or decide them in a more modest manner) than they may think in order to preserve separation-of-powers values. This approach allows courts largely (though not entirely) to avoid making politically controversial 
decisions that might cast questions on their institutional competence, while allowing 
the courts on limited occasions to stake out their more popular role as defender of rights. At the same time, there are ways in which courts can distance themselves from the policies in question, thus ensuring that political accountability for the policy falls squarely on the executive. 
1395. Robert Chesney, (Texas law professor), VIRGINIA LAW REVIEW, Sept. 23, 
2009 retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm]abstract_id=1348804. Judicial involvement in national security litigation, as noted at the outset, poses unusual risks for the judiciary as an institution. Such cases are more likely than most to involve claims of special, or even exclusive, executive branch 
authority. They are more likely than most to involve a perception - on the part of the 
public, the government, or judges themselves - of unusually high stakes. They are more likely than most to be in the media spotlight and hence in view of the public in a meaningful sense. These cases are, as a result of all this, especially salient as a political matter. And therein lies the danger for the courts. Because of these elements, an inappropriate judicial intervention in national security litigation is unusually likely to generate a response from the other branches or the public at large that might harm the institutional interests of the judiciary, either by undermining its prestige and authority or perhaps even by triggering some form of concrete political response. 
1396. David Cole, (Georgetown law professor), WAYNE STATE LAW REVIEW, 
2012, retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://scholarship.law.georgetown.edu/cgi/  [HYPERLINK: http://scholarship.law.georgetown.edu/cgi/]viewcontent.cgi?article=2129&context=facpub. Indeed, a court concerned about conserving its own institutional power might be more likely to defer during times of crisis. One cannot be certain how the public will respond to a decision. Ruling for --the enemy‖ during wartime could be a risky proposition. A court primarily concerned about maintaining its institutional capital might therefore make the strategic choice to defer in times of crisis so as to avoid showdowns that could undermine its legitimacy, thereby preserving its power for ordinary times. 
Accordingly, it is not obvious that the Supreme Court's own institutional interests in 
times of crisis push it in the direction of intervention, rather than deference or avoidance. 
1397. Harlan Grant Cohen, (Prof., Law U. Georgia), GEORGE WASHINGTON 
LAW REVIEW, Mar. 20, 2014 retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/]sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2412103. The formalist trend in Roberts Court jurisprudence suggests that the Court is trying break free of functionalism's pull. But can functionalism's visceral appeal simply be willed away? One might be skeptical. Undoubtedly, there will still be cases that seems so delicate, so beyond the Court's 
expertise, so political dangerous, and so hard to solve with typical judicial tools, that 
any court would think twice about wading in. Perhaps in such cases the Court's newfound formalism will be brushed aside in favor of more traditional functionalism. arguably what happened in Boumediene and Arizona v. U.S. But there is another possibility: The Court may avoid those cases altogether. The Court has clearly become uncomfortable with functionalism and the broad discretion it provides to various constitutional actors. Retreating back to those methods when the issues seem too fraught might undo all the Court's work over the last nine years to rein those actors in. And yet, formal tools seem inappropriate; the only option may be to avoid the case altogether. Perhaps the plaintiff hasn't pled properly or doesn't have standing. Important challenges to government anti-terrorism efforts have been rejected by the Court as two loosely pled or beyond the Court's jurisdiction. Could members of the Court have shied away from the two cases for the same reasons other embraced foreign affairs formalism? It's impossible to know. 
1398. Jacob Gershman, (Wall Street Journal law blog editor), WALL STREET 
JOURNAL, April 21, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://blogs.wsj.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://blogs.wsj.com/]law/2014/04/21/israel-passport-case-returns-to-the-supreme-court/. Wading into the minefield of the Middle East, the U.S. Supreme Court on Monday agreed to review the constitutionality of a federal statute that lets Americans citizens born in Jerusalem 
list --Israel‖ as their birthplace on their U.S. passports. The case was brought by the 
parents of 11-year-old Menachem Zivotofsky, an American citizen born in west Jerusalem in 2002. The child's mother wanted her son's passport to record --Israel‖  --  not --Jerusalem‖  --  as his place of birth. But the State Department denied the request, part of a longstanding policy neutrality with respect to the status of Jerusalem. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	10 9 
 
 
 
1399. Mario Trujillo, (Staff), THE HILL, April 21, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://thehill.com/policy/international/203966-court-to-hear-jerusalem-passport-  [HYPERLINK: http://thehill.com/policy/international/203966-court-to-hear-jerusalem-passport-]case. The case has the potential to revive a dicey issue that gained relevance on the presidential campaign in 2012, when former GOP presidential candidate Mitt Romney said he would recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and move the U.S. Embassy there if he were president. The Obama administration had urged the court to not take up the case, arguing the law infringes on the executive branch's sole authority to decide whether and on what terms to recognize a foreign state. The court battle, which has divided the executive and Congress, stems from a provision tucked inside the Foreign Relations Authorization Act in fiscal year 2003, which laid out the passport rules. 
1400. Tom Clark, (Emory political science professor), AMERICAN JOURNAL OF 
POLITICAL SCIENCE, October 2009, retrieved April 16, 2015 from Wiley. This theoretical model and empirical analyses presented in this article provide a new interpretation of the separation of-powers model that has been the focus of much scholarship in the area of judicial-congressional relations. The evidence from interviews with Supreme Court justices and former law clerks suggests students of Court-Congress relations must account for the role of judicial legitimacy in the 


1404. Yu Ouyang (Kentucky political science PhD student), APSA 2012 ANNUAL MEETING PAPER, Aug. 7, 2012 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn/]com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2108245. Students of the judicial decision-making literature argue that Supreme Court justices follow a strategic behavior model, which states that justices rationally anticipate the potential responses from Congress, the president, and the public. Specifically, McGuire and Stimson assert that what impel 
the justices to follow public opinion are the Court's expectations about the future 
consequences of its decisions. In other words, the justices themselves take notice of public opinion, assess the potential impact of their decisions on future attitudes and evaluations of the Court, and alter their behaviors accordingly. However, recognizing that they . . . must on occasions stand against the winds of public opinion‖, Supreme Court justices must take caution in how they craft their decisions so as not to lose their broad base of support from the public. Judicial scholars assert that, by maintaining some minimal level of diffuse support, the Supreme Court then has the political capital to stand against public opinion, if necessary. The question I examine 
is how does diffuse support relate to unilateral actions. [ellipsis in original] 
1405. Yishai Schwartz, (Lawfare blog associate editor), NEW REPUBLIC, Oct. 31, 
2014 retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.newrepublic.com/article/120081/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.newrepublic.com/article/120081/]

Court's decision calculus. Judicial legitimacy is an important mechanism that drives 	jerusalem-passport-case-can-check-presidents-foreign-affairs-power. 	But 	the 

judicial sensitivity to congressional preferences. Moreover, it can be a condition that gives rise to constrained judicial decision making. Indeed, scholars have long recognized the importance of institutional legitimacy for the Supreme Court; however, this study unites this literature with scholarship on congressional constraints on judicial behavior in a previously unappreciated way. 
1401. Tom Clark, (Emory political science professor), AMERICAN JOURNAL OF 
POLITICAL SCIENCE, October 2009, retrieved April 16, 2015 from Wiley. As a first step in this empirical direction, the analysis of Court curbing and its relationship to the use of judicial review to invalidate federal legislation provides promising evidence. As the analysis above demonstrates, the relationship between the frequency of judicial review and congressional hostility provides strong, direct support for the theoretical model. When the Court fears it will lose public support, it will adjust its behavior in light of congressional signals about the Court's level of public support. However, the magnitude of that effect is mediated by the political context in which those signals are sent. Instead of responding to Court curbing more strongly when it is facing its ideological opponents, the Court responds most strongly when the Court 
Zivotofskys' deeper argument, and the one that could finally succeed in constraining 
presidential power, is that Congress actually has a robust role in foreign policy. The Constitution gives the president the power to nominate ambassadors and make treaties, but only with the --advice and consent of the Senate.‖ The president might be the commander in chief of the military, but only Congress can declare war. The 
president is instructed to --receive ambassadors,‖ but only Congress is authorized to 
--regulate commerce with foreign nations.‖ Similarly, argue the Zivotofskys, Congress plays a part in recognizing foreign governments (and has done so occasionally in the past). So when Congress legislates on issues of recognition and foreign affairs, the president cannot ignore an explicit directive. Presidential discretion may be wide in foreign policy, but only because the demands of secret negotiations and swift diplomacy prevent us from relying on the plodding pace of Congressional deliberation. The principle of Congressional supremacy, however, 
remains: When Congress finally stirs itself to legislate, the president must obey. 
1406. Yishai Schwartz, (Lawfare blog associate editor), NEW REPUBLIC, Oct. 31, 
2014 retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.newrepublic.com/article/120081/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.newrepublic.com/article/120081/]

curbing comes from its ideological allies. Moreover, the constraining effect of Court 	jerusalem-passport-case-can-check-presidents-foreign-affairs-power. 	These 	are 

curbing increases as the Court becomes more pessimistic about its public support. Notably, these interactive relationships run against the intuition following from the conventional wisdom that Court curbing's effect on the Court is due to its threat of enactment. They are, however, predicted by the public-Congress-Court interaction analyzed here. 
1402. Guy Davidov, (Hebrew University of Jerusalem law professor), ISRAEL LAW 
REVIEW, March 2013, retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/]papers.cfm?abstract_id=2561180. It would hardly be surprising to learn that professional judges - like other humans - might use the weapons of inﬂuence identified in the literature in their personal interactions with other people, including fellow judges. Consider, for example, judges A and B, who are sitting on the same 
bench and have disagreements about the merits of a case. It is certainly plausible that 
A would try to convince B not only by putting forward her best arguments, but also by subtly reminding him that she sided with him in the past (thus relying on the principle of reciprocation); by trying to show how her position can be derived from his own previous judgments (relying on the principle of consistency); by pointing out that other judges support her position (relying on the principle of social proof); by being socially likeable (relying on the principle of liking); by emphasizing her knowledge and credentials in the specific area under consideration (relying on the principle of authority); or by arguing that her position is unique and original and 
therefore likely to attract the attention of appeal court judges (relying on the principle 
of scarcity). Surely not all judges use such methods, but nothing in such interactions would be especially noteworthy. It is, however, much less obvious to argue that weapons of inﬂuence are also used by courts institutionally (that is, in their judgments). In this article we make this argument, proposing that courts may be seen as using such inﬂuence methods in their relationship vis-à-vis other institutional actors - particularly the government and the legislature - as well as the public at large. 
1403. Guy Davidov, (Hebrew University of Jerusalem law professor), ISRAEL LAW 
REVIEW, March 2013, retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/]
papers.cfm?abstract_id=2561180. From a formalistic (and in our opinion, naïve) viewpoint, it could be argued that courts do not try to inﬂuence anyone. They are not making requests and they are not selling anything; they have the power to make legally binding rulings unilaterally. But courts, in fact, work within a complex web of relations with the government, the legislature, the legal community and the public at large. While courts generally develop the law within the confines of their legal mandate, the boundaries of this mandate are far from clear. Moreover, formal authority aside, they frequently prefer to minimize conﬂict with the other branches of 
government, to secure broad support for their judgments and preserve legitimacy. 
Holding neither sword nor purse, courts often have to manage conﬂicts with the other branches - and they have limited ‗institutional capital' to do so. It is therefore clear that courts do not simply lay down the law; rather, they need to convince the other branches to accept it with minimum resistance. Weapons of inﬂuence can thus 
become useful, as courts attempt to inﬂuence others or secure their support. 
diametrically opposed views. In one, the president is a mere agent, albeit one who has 
by necessity been given a great deal of discretion. In the second, he is sovereign. That latter view is frightening. Congressional supremacy is the basis of our entire constitutional system, and congressional oversight our best protection against tyranny. To be sure, a powerful executive, capable of acting against sudden threats and during periods of Congressional dysfunction (like now), is essential. Someone must fill the void. But allowing presidential discretion to become presidential 
supremacy undermines basic principles of democracy. In a democracy, after all, it is 
the people that are sovereign. It would be bizarre if their representatives, tasked with confirming treaties, regulating international trade and declaring war, had to bow to the president in smaller matters of foreign policy. 
1407. Yishai Schwartz, (Lawfare blog associate editor), NEW REPUBLIC, Oct. 31, 
2014 retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.newrepublic.com/article/120081/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.newrepublic.com/article/120081/]jerusalem-passport-case-can-check-presidents-foreign-affairs-power. On Monday, the Court will have the opportunity to finally weigh these two views of presidential power. The case could not come at a more opportune time. President Obama, 
especially, has pushed his independent war-making powers to (and some would say 
beyond) their outer limits. He has stared down Congressional hawks over Iran, and may soon try to loosen sanctions unilaterally. Congress and the courts must reassert themselves. This case, where the president is acting in defiance of explicit Congressional legislation and where his power is at its --lowest ebb,‖ is the ideal means to do so. 
1408. Greg Abbott, (Texas attorney general), AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION, 
2014, retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/]
publications/supreme_court_preview/BriefsV4/13-628_pet_amcu_texas.authcheck 
dam.pdf. This Court has never before held that the President's foreign-affairs powers 
may trump an Act of Congress. A ruling for the Secretary will establish a new and potentially far-reaching doctrine of executive power, which could be used to justify all manner of Presidential disregard of congressional enactments. It is hard to imagine how this Court could write a narrow opinion in the Secretary's favor, because the power that the Secretary asserts has no textual basis in Article II and is (at best) only marginally related to the President's time-honored practice of recognizing foreign governments without congressional authorization. 
1409. Greg Abbott, (Texas attorney general), AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION, 
2014, retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/]
publications/supreme_court_preview/BriefsV4/13-628_pet_amcu_texas.authcheck 
dam.pdf. The Secretary is asking this Court to establish a substantive-due-process- like doctrine for executive power, which would allow Presidents to nullify democratically enacted legislation based not on the text of the Constitution but on --longstanding practices].‖ D.C. Cir. Appellee's Br. at 44; cf. Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702, 720-21 (1997). Substantive due process is controversial enough in the individual-rights context. See, e.g., Moore v. East Cleveland, 431 U.S. 494, 544 (1977) (White, J., dissenting) (--[T]his Court is the most vulnerable and comes nearest to illegitimacy when it deals with judge-made constitutional law 
having little or no cognizable roots in the language or even the design of the 
Constitution.‖). Its mode of reasoning should not be extended into executive-power disputes. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	11 0 
 
 
 
1410. Greg Abbott, (Texas attorney general), AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION, 2014, retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/]
publications/supreme_court_preview/BriefsV4/13-628_pet_amcu_texas.authcheck 
dam.pdf. First, as this case demonstrates, Presidents will attempt to expand the scope of their powers by defining --longstanding practice‖ at a high level of abstraction. The historical evidence cited by the Secretary shows only that the President has recognized foreign governments without congressional authorization. Yet the Secretary has used this evidence to defend a much broader Presidential prerogative: the power to resolve --other questions of U.S. policy regarding the [recognized] state,‖ without regard to whether Congress has authorized, acquiesced in, or prohibited his actions. D.C. Cir. Appellee's Br. at 17. The Secretary is seeking to expand Presidential power by boosting the level of generality at which he defines the relevant --longstanding practice‖ --  just as some jurists have sought to expand judicial power in substantive-due-process cases by defining traditionally respected rights at higher levels of abstraction. Compare Michael K v. Gerald D., 491 U.S. 110, 127 n.6 (1989) (opinion of Scalia, J.), with id. at 137-41 (Brennan, J., dissenting). Even if this Court were to demand that the --longstanding practice[s]‖ be defined with specificity, that will not ensure that future Presidents or courts will follow the instruction -- especially when a ruling for the Secretary will require this Court to resort to some degree of abstraction. 
1411. Theodore Olson, (former Solicitor General), AMERICAN BAR 
ASSOCIATION, 2014, retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.americanbar.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.americanbar.org/]content/dam/aba/publications/supreme_court_preview/BriefsV4/13-628_pet_amcu_ 
ushr.authcheckdam.pdf. The court of appeals' adoption of the broadest possible view of the President's recognition power also threatens to demote Congress from the President's counterweight in foreign affairs to his minion. The Constitution grants to 
Congress a wide array of foreign affairs powers. See infra pp. 11-12. The 
implementation of foreign policy -- including with respect to matters that implicate recognition -- depends on Congress's exercise of these powers. See, e.g., Burmese Freedom and Democracy Act of 2003, Pub. L. No. 108-61, §§ 1-9, 117 Stat. 864 (codified at 50 U.S.C. § 1701 note (2012)) (imposing trade and visa bans against Burma's military regime); infra pp. 13- 14 (discussing additional examples). Our constitutional framework contemplates not only cooperation between the branches of government in this arena, but also a measure of tension. Indeed, in its division of powers, the Constitution is --an invitation to struggle for the privilege of directing 
American foreign policy.‖ Edward S. Corwin, The President: Office and Powers, 
1787-1984 201 (Randall Bland et al. eds., 5th ed. 1984). Since the Founding, Congress and the President have been engaged in that fruitful and dynamic struggle. The zones of exclusivity for either branch have been drawn narrowly. 
1412. Theodore Olson, (former Solicitor General), AMERICAN BAR 
ASSOCIATION, 2014, retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.americanbar.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.americanbar.org/]content/dam/aba/publications/supreme_court_preview/BriefsV4/13-628_pet_amcu_ 
ushr.authcheckdam.pdf. The D.C. Circuit's holding threatens to upset the Constitution's careful balance of powers in foreign affairs. The upshot of the decision 
below is not only that the President has plenary power over questions of recognition, 
but also that the Executive is given carte blanche to treat as unconstitutional -- and to refuse to comply with -- any Act of Congress that it determines touches on recognition policy. The recognition power cannot be drawn so broadly as to envelop completely, at the Executive's sole discretion, the exercise of Congress's law-making authority in the fields of immigration, naturalization, foreign commerce, passport control, criminal law, and foreign policy. 
1413. Theodore Olson, (former Solicitor General), AMERICAN BAR 
ASSOCIATION, 2014, retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.americanbar.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.americanbar.org/]content/dam/aba/publications/supreme_court_preview/BriefsV4/13-628_pet_amcu_ 
ushr.authcheckdam.pdf. Whether the recognition power is not only held exclusively 
by the Executive, but is also so sweeping as to render Congress impotent to act simply because the President determines, in his unreviewable discretion, that particular legislation implicates recognition policy, undoubtedly presents --an important question of federal law that has not been, but should be, settled by this Court.‖ Sup. Ct. R. 10(c). Review of this question would be warranted even if the court below had upheld the statute at issue. Here, where the court of appeals has --exercise[d] . . . the grave power of annulling an Act of Congress,‖ due respect for a coordinate branch of government demands that certiorari be granted. United States v. 
Gainey, 380 U.S. 63, 65 (1965); Eugene Gressman et al., Supreme Court Practice 264 
(9th ed. 2007) (collecting cases). [ellipsis in original] 
1414. Eugene Kontorovich, (Northwestern law professor), AMERICAN BAR 
ASSOCIATION, 2014, retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.americanbar.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.americanbar.org/]content/dam/aba/publications/supreme_court_preview/BriefsV4/13-628_pet_amcu_ 
ldbc.authcheckdam.pdf. Imagine if Congress passed a free trade regime with Ruritania, to the consternation of U.S. widget manufacturers distressed by the new competition from Ruritania's powerful widget industry. Under the government's theory, a president could effectively rewrite the free trade law by refusing to 
--recognize‖ the widget-producing area as part of Ruritania. At the behest of domestic 
vintners, the President could refuse to list Bordeaux as a part of France, and instead apply to the region's wines the higher tariff assigned to another nation. The President could target products from any disputed territory, e.g., Falklands wool or Gibraltar fish. The prospect for mischief is endless. 
1415. Eugene Kontorovich, (Northwestern law professor), AMERICAN BAR 
ASSOCIATION, 2014, retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.americanbar.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.americanbar.org/]content/dam/aba/publications/supreme_court_preview/BriefsV4/13-628_pet_amcu_ ldbc.authcheckdam.pdf. Adopting the Government's view in this case would, far 
from avoiding unnecessary constitutional questions, cast substantial doubt on the 
validity of important existing trade agreements, spending measures and other legislation whose constitutionality has previously never been questioned. It would also mean that the President can in effect expand or narrow duly enacted laws about naturalization, war, foreign trade and tariffs, foreign aid, and more, simply by making arbitrary and unreviewable determinations about --where‖ particular places are. Such vast powers should not be lightly inferred given the lack of any precedent for an exclusive presidential --geographic‖ authority. 


1416. Eugene Kontorovich, (Northwestern law professor), WASHINGTON POST, April 24, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/]volokh-conspiracy/wp/2014/04/24/why-the-court-should-uphold-congresss-power-in- the- jerusalem-passport-case/. Or imagine if Congress passed a law, pursuant to its Foreign Commerce power, eliminating tariffs from products from China. The Executive could not continue to apply tariffs to products from, say, Tibet, on the 
grounds that he thinks it is not really part of China (especially Congress clearly 
included Tibet). In short, any legislative power regarding foreign matters requires Congress to be able to make territorial determinations about the countries to which it applies. Immigration seems to be a reasonable application. Congress wants to have certain visa rules for some countries and not others. To make such a regime work, it needs to be able determine what places are in what countries. Lets say Congress adopts a liberal visa regime with China. If the Executive does not apply it to Tibet, or the territory of the former Second East Turkmen Republic, Congress's legitimate and normal exercise of its powers would be nullified. 
1417. Olumide Obayemi, (East Bay law school professor), ANNUAL SURVEY OF 
INTERNATIONAL & COMPARATIVE LAW, 2006, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://digitalcommons.law.ggu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1100&context=annls  [HYPERLINK: http://digitalcommons.law.ggu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1100&amp;context=annls]urvey. The United States must abide by the rigorous standards set out above that are meant to govern the use of preemptive strikes, because today's international system is characterized by a relative infrequency of interstate war. It has been noted that developing doctrines that lower the threshold for preemptive action could put that accomplishment at risk, and exacerbate regional crises already on the brink of open conflict. This is important as O'Hanlon, Rice, and Steinberg have rightly noted: . . . 
countries already on the brink of war, and leaning strongly towards war, might use 
the doctrine to justify an action they already wished to take, and the effect of the U.S. posture may make it harder for the international community in general, and the U.S. in particular, to counsel delay and diplomacy. Potential examples abound, ranging from Ethiopia and Eritrea, to China and Taiwan, to the Middle East. But perhaps the clearest case is the India-Pakistan crisis. The world must be a safe place to live in. We cannot be ruled by bandits and rogue states. There must be law and order not only in the books but in enforcement as well. No nation is better suited to enforce international law than the United States. The Bush Doctrine will stand the test of time and survive. Again, we submit that nothing more would protect the world and its 
citizens from nuclear weapons, terrorists and rogue states than an able and willing 
nation like the United States, acting as a policeman of the world within all legal boundaries. This is the essence of the preamble to the United Nations Charter. 
[ellipsis in original] 
1418. Fred Branfman, (anti-war activist and Harvard political science masters), 
ALTERNET, June 9, 2013 retrieved May 2, 2015 from http://www.alternet.org/news-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.alternet.org/news-]amp-politics/executive-branch-threatens-us-national-security. U.S. Executive Branch foreign and military policy is characterized above all by two fatal flaws. In the 1960s Senator William Fulbright criticized the Executive's --arrogance of power‖, and this 
arrogance - combined with ignorance about the countries they attack - has continued 
until today. U.S. officials regularly try to force local leaders to behave as the Executive wishes, even when these leaders believe it is against their national interests. And the Executive ignores the local public opinion that is increasing the power of anti-U.S. groupings throughout the Third World. Its second flaw is conducting a short-term, tactics-oriented foreign and military policy at the expense of long-term strategic U.S. interests. For nearly a decade, for example, U.S. Executive military and political leaders were so obsessed with achieving short-term military successes in Afghanistan that they endangered far more important long-term U.S. 
strategic interests in nuclear-armed Pakistan. 
1419. Fred Branfman, (anti-war activist and Harvard political science masters), 
ALTERNET, June 9, 2013 retrieved May 2, 2015 from http://www.alternet.org/news-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.alternet.org/news-]amp-politics/executive-branch-threatens-us-national-security. Both arrogance and short-term thinking are in dramatic evidence today in what is the U.S. Executive's single greatest strategic error since Vietnam: its waging an expanding war in the 1.8 billion strong, nuclear-armed and oil-rich Muslim world. Its policies are turning hundreds of millions of Muslims against the U.S., including countless potential suicide bombers, as it creates far more enemies than it kills. If Executive actions were 
protecting the U.S., the numbers of U.S. foes would be decreasing. Instead they are 
exponentially increasing, and spreading to an increasing number of nations. Executive arrogance, ignorance and short-term thinking are most dangerous today in Pakistan, a nation of 180 million people possessing well over 100 nuclear weapons. This nuclear stockpile, a Harvard Study has reported, is the fastest-growing and least stable in the world. It was for this reason that President Obama said --Pakistan‖ in response to actor George Clooney's question as to what issue most keeps him up night. 
1420. Fred Branfman, (anti-war activist and Harvard political science masters), 
ALTERNET, June 9, 2013 retrieved May 2, 2015 from http://www.alternet.org/news-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.alternet.org/news-]amp-politics/executive-branch-threatens-us-national-security. Although Pakistan is the most flagrant example of U.S. Executive incompetence, however, its general pattern of ignoring Arab public opinion has sown a whirlwind throughout the Muslim World, from Egypt to Asia to Africa. Its support for the hated Hosni Mubarak in Egypt until the very end has helped bring the far more anti-U.S. Muslim Brotherhood to power in that pivotal nation. And hatred of the U.S. has also fanned the flames of jihadism and helped extremists increase their power and influence throughout the Muslim World. The U.S. Executive's invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq while Mr. Bush was President, and its escalation of drone strikes under Mr. Obama, has 
dramatically reduced U.S. national security and could well cost many U.S. lives at 
home and abroad in the coming decade. 
1421. Massimiliano Cali, (World Bank trade economist), BROOKINGS, Feb. 24, 
2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/future-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/future-]development/posts/2015/02/24-trade-conflict-cali-oliver. Even fragile countries that have been at peace for some time continue to face a high risk of relapsing into conflict. Understanding the factors that can reduce the risk of conflict is paramount for the prosperity of fragile countries and their citizens. Our recent work suggests that international trade can have an outsized influence -- positive and negative -- on this 
risk. When there is chaos at home, a disproportionate amount of income, food, and 
other basic means of survival tend to come from other countries. For example, fragile countries on average are net food importers, while other developing countries are net food exporters. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	11 1 
 
 
 
1422. Massimiliano Cali, (World Bank trade economist), BROOKINGS, Feb. 24, 2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/future-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/future-]development/posts/2015/02/24-trade-conflict-cali-oliver. A second, more hopeful hypothesis is the opportunity cost effect, which posits that when trade translates into higher incomes, people are less likely to engage in conflict. While the cross-country evidence does not support this hypothesis, case studies of Nigeria and the Palestinian territories do. This difference between cross-country and individual country studies is consistent with much of the existing evidence. We suggest that country case studies are better suited to isolate this dynamic because the available data is better and the heterogeneity across subnational areas is smaller. 
1423. Massimiliano Cali, (World Bank trade economist), BROOKINGS, Feb. 24, 
2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/future-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/future-]development/posts/2015/02/24-trade-conflict-cali-oliver. We also find that the opportunity cost effect can also apply to neighboring countries. Neighboring states play important roles in almost all modern civil wars, so intense trading with one's neighbors reduces the duration of civil conflict. If country A and country B trade a lot 
with each other, country B will have higher incentives in helping country A to 
maintain internal stability (and vice-versa). When this trading occurs under trade agreements, it also reduces the risk of conflict. 
1424. Massimiliano Cali, (World Bank trade economist), BROOKINGS, Feb. 24, 
2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/future-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/future-]development/posts/2015/02/24-trade-conflict-cali-oliver. Protect the real incomes of producers, consumers and workers from adverse changes in trade flows. Various policy options exist to do this, such as targeted transfers, public works programs, price subsidies, and temporary trade insulation. Promote labor-intensive exports. 
Improving market access and enhance the competitiveness of firms are two key ways 
of doing it. Strengthen trading relations with neighbors. As better data and analytical tools become available, evidence is growing that trade has the potential to stem violence and promote stability. With some resolve, policymakers and the international community can use this evidence to improve the lives of some of the most vulnerable populations in the world. 
1425. Keith Whitington, (Princeton politics professor), NOTRE DAME LAW 
REVIEW, May 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://scholarship.law.nd.edu/  [HYPERLINK: http://scholarship.law.nd.edu/]cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4562&context=ndlr. Over the past three decades, the 
Court has made a gradual transition away from the extension and application of the 
liberal precedents of the Warren Court and the early Burger Court, but it has not replaced that caseload with a similarly robust set of new constitutional commitments. Liberal Justices had driven the exercise of judicial renew to invalidate statutes well into the 1980s. As the liberal wing of the Court lost support the Court became less interested in nullifying the actions of legislatures. A Court that often turned on the whims of Justice Anthony Kennedy may have been more bipolar, sometimes empowering liberal-leaning majorities and sometimes empowering conservative- leaning majorities, but it was becoming less, not more, activist. There are few signs that any of the Justices doubt their own role within the constitutional system or 
believe in a generalized posture of judicial restraint. They all prefer to be activist 
when they believe that the legislature has made a constitutional error, and they are willing to override vocal minorities on the bench or political opposition outside the Court in order to enforce their views of constitutional requirements. The Court may not need to commit itself to a theory of judicial restraint, however, in order to be restrained. The Justices are rarely able to assemble a majority to strike down laws, and they have given little indication that they nurture an expansive constitutional agenda of the type that drove the Court to the height of its activism in the mid- twentieth century. As a consequence. Chief Justice Rehnquist and Chief Justice 
Roberts have overseen a Court that has surprisingly become one of the least activist 
in history, and perhaps have pointed the way for the Court to retreat from the role that it played within the political system through most of the twentieth century and make a return to the more modest judicial role that characterized the nineteenth century. 
1426. Keith Whitington, (Princeton politics professor), NOTRE DAME LAW 
REVIEW, May 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://scholarship.law.nd.edu/  [HYPERLINK: http://scholarship.law.nd.edu/]cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4562&context=ndlr. My starting point is to observe that the Roberts Court has invalidated statutes in fewer cases per year than had any previous modern Court. Under Chief Justice Roberts, the Court has struck down 
statutes at an annual average rate of 3.8 cases, which is the fewest since before the 
Civil War (only the Gilded Age Courts are even close). The rate of invalidation is a bit more complicated if cases involving federal laws are distinguished from cases involving state laws. Over the course of the Court's history, it has been far more active in striking down state laws than federal laws. This tendency no doubt reflects both the relative political vulnerability of the states to federal judicial oversight (compared to the coordinate branches of the federal government) and the relative abundance and diversity of state laws compared to congressional statutes. The Roberts Court has struck down federal law in fewer cases, on average, than any modem Court, with the exception of the immediate post-New Deal Courts. The change is even more striking in cases involving die invalidation of state laws. The Roberts Court has struck down state laws in fewer cases per year than any Court since the Civil War, by a significant margin. 
1427. Jess Bravin, (Wall Street Journal correspondent), WALL STREET JOURNAL, 
July 1, 2014 retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.wsj.com/articles/chief-justice-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.wsj.com/articles/chief-justice-]roberts-maneuvering-draws-in-courts-liberal-bloc-1404238811. You don't obviously compromise strongly held views, but you do have to be open to the considered views of your colleagues,‖ he said at the hearings. The chief justice, he added, --has a particular obligation to try to achieve consensus.‖ Cornell law professor Michael Dorf 
said demonstrating the ability to work with different factions on the court builds 
legitimacy for a chief justice. --I think he cares about that, and he's going to take those opportunities when they present themselves,‖ Mr. Dorf said. He added it is --also possible that the liberals are pulling Roberts a little bit towards the center.‖ In some instances the chief justice influenced rulings that ended up in split votes, while in others the court ruled unanimously on the main holding while conservatives disagreed with the outcome's limited scope. 


1428. Neal Katyal, (Georgetown law professor), NEW YORK TIME, June 26, 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/27/opinion/the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/27/opinion/the-]supreme-courts-powerful-new-consensus.html. For years, particularly after the 2000 election, talk about the Supreme Court has centered on its bitter 5-to-4 divisions. Yet it is worth reflecting on a remarkable achievement: The court has agreed unanimously in more than 66 percent of its cases this term (and that figure holds even if Monday's 
remaining two cases, on the Affordable Care Act's contraceptive coverage and on 
public-sector unions, are not unanimous). The last year this happened was 1940. The justices' ability to cross partisan divides and find common ground in their bottom-line judgment in roughly two-thirds of their cases  --  including the two decisions handed down Thursday, restricting the president's ability to issue recess appointments during brief breaks in the Senate's work, and striking down a Massachusetts ban on protests near abortion clinics  --  should remind us that even in this hyperpartisan age, there is a difference between law and politics. 
1429. Ed Morrissey, (Hot Air editor), HOT AIR, July 14, 2014 retrieved April 14, 
2015 from http://hotair.com/archives/2014/07/14/gallup-approval-for-supreme-court-  [HYPERLINK: http://hotair.com/archives/2014/07/14/gallup-approval-for-supreme-court-]
flips-as-gop-favor-soars/. It doesn't help Democrats that their rhetoric has so far --been untethered from those basic facts‖ of the Hobby Lobby decision, as Glenn Kessler wrote in his fact check on multiple statements from Democrats. Oddly, even though Kessler repeatedly found that these claims were blatantly false  --  for instance, Rep. Gwen Moore's (D-WI) insistence that the court ruled that bosses could --tell their employees that they cannot use birth control‖  --  Kessler didn't assign anyone any of his Pinocchios. --The Fact Checker generally does not award Pinocchios for --misspeaking‖ or for statements of opinion,‖ Kessler wrote, but most 
of these were made as statements of fact, not opinion. The Hobby Lobby decision 
isn't stoking widespread outrage, even while Democrats attempt widespread demagoguery. If Senate Democrats try repealing part of the RFRA as a way to turn the midterms in their favor, they will almost certainly see the project backfire as Republicans demand to know why they're attacking religious freedom. Have fun storming that castle, Democrats, especially in this election cycle. 
1430. New York Time Editorial Board, May 31, 2013 retrieved April 14, 2015 from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/01/opinion/what-makes-the-dc-circuit-different.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/01/opinion/what-makes-the-dc-circuit-different]
html?_r=0. Arguing about the caseload, however, misses the point. As Chief Justice John Roberts Jr. explained in a 2005 lecture  --  --What Makes the D.C. Circuit 
Different?‖  --  the court has a --special responsibility to review legal challenges to the 
conduct of the national government.‖ Because of that role, about two-thirds of the cases before the D.C. Circuit involve the federal government in some civil capacity, a far greater percentage than are before other appeals courts in the system. The disputes, often extremely complex and time-consuming, deal with federal regulation about the environment, national security and other key areas. That is the reason the court has been considered a national bench, with judges regularly appointed from outside the District of Columbia. 
1431. Patricia Wald, (former DC Circuit Chief Judge), WASHINGTON POST, Feb. 
28, 2013 retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.washingtonpost.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.washingtonpost.com/]
opinions/senate-must-act-on-appeals-court-vacancies/2013/02/28/e8ad3d3a-8051- 
11e2-b99e-6baf4ebe42df_story.html. The court's vacancies date to 2005, and it has not received a new appointment since 2006. The number of pending cases per judge has grown from 119 in 2005 to 188 today. A great many of these are not easy cases. The D.C. Circuit hears the most complex, time-consuming, labyrinthine disputes over regulations with the greatest impact on ordinary Americans' lives: clean air and water regulations, nuclear plant safety, health-care reform issues, insider trading and more. These cases can require thousands of hours of preparation by the judges, often 
consuming days of argument, involving hundreds of parties and interveners, and 
necessitating dozens of briefs and thousands of pages of record  --  all of which culminates in lengthy, technically intricate legal opinions. 
1432. Thomas Susman (Government Affairs Office director), AMERICAN BAR 
ASSOCIATION, Oct. 29, 2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.american bar.org/content/dam/aba/uncategorized/GAO/2013oct29_judgeshiph_l.authcheckdam .pdf. The district courts in which the Judicial Conference is recommending additional judgeships currently are laboring under weighted case filings of almost 630 per authorized judgeship, far above the 430 weighted caseload threshold that the Judicial Conference uses as a starting point for examining a district court's need for additional judgeships. If Congress created all of the judgeships requested, the weighted caseload of all authorized district court judgeships would still be in excess of 430 cases. In some jurisdictions, caseloads are dramatically worse: judges of the District of Arizona and the Western District of Texas have caseloads that exceed 700 weighted filings, and judges in three districts - the Eastern District of California, the Eastern District of Texas, and the District of Delaware  --  labor to dispense timely justice with weighted caseloads of over 1,000 per judge. The litigants before these courts deserve better. 
1433. Jennifer Luse, (Stephen F. Austin professor), AMERICAN POLITICS 
RESEARCH, January 2009, retrieved April 14, 2015 from Sage. Through its rulings, the U.S. Supreme Court makes clear what the Constitution means and how best to interpret congressional statutes. However, despite its enunciation of what the Constitution requires or the meaning of federal statutes. Supreme Court policies do not automatically implement themselves; rather the Court relies on compliance by, inter alia, the lower federal courts in effectuating its policies. Scholars never tire of exploring judicial compliance because the matter is fraught with meaning for understanding the Court's role in American politics and society. If a definitive meaning for constitutional dictates or statutory meaning were to be completely absent, the democracy would, in many ways, be crippled. An ineffectual Court -- one that handed down rulings only to be ignored by inferior tribunals -- would be singularly enfeebled in the administration of justice. Furthermore, if there were no meaningful authority attached to the Court's rulings, the Court would sit at a hollow apex and perform little more than a ceremonial role. As a consequence, studies of federal law (as well as Congress, the president, and the states) would wisely ignore its decisions. It behooves us, then, to ascertain the extent to which the Court is efficacious in terms of its written policy. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	11 2 
 
 
 
1434. Christopher Pyle, (Mount Holyoke College constitutional law professor), PRESIDENTIAL STUDIES QUARTERLY, December 2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from JSTOR. But this is not the only double standard that Obama's attorney general has endorsed. Like his predecessors, Holder has chosen to deny some prisoners any trials at all, either because the government lacks sufficient evidence to guarantee their convictions or because what --evidence‖ it does have is fatally tainted by torture and would deeply embarrass the United States if revealed in open court. At one point, the president considered asking Congress to pass a preventive detention law. Then he decided to institute the policy himself and defy the courts to overrule him, thereby forcing judges to assume primary blame for any crimes against the United States committed by prisoners following a court-ordered release. According to Holder, courts and commissions are --essential tools in our fight against terrorism‖. If they will not serve that end, the administration will disregard them. The attorney general also assured senators that if any of the defendants are acquitted, the administration will still keep them behind bars. It is difficult to imagine a greater contempt for the rule of law than this refusal to abide by the judgment of a court. Indeed, it is grounds for Holder's disbarment. 
1435. Christopher Pyle, (Mount Holyoke College constitutional law professor), 
PRESIDENTIAL STUDIES QUARTERLY, December 2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from JSTOR. It is probably naïve to expect much more of an elected official. Few presidents willingly give up power or seek to leave their office --weaker‖ than they found it. Few now have what it takes to stand up to the national security state or to those in Congress and the corporations that profit from it. Moreover, were the president to revive the torture policy, there would be insufficient opposition in Congress to stop him. The Democrats are too busy stimulating the economies of their constituents and too timid to defend the rule of law. The Republicans are similarly preoccupied, but actually favor torture, provided it can be camouflaged with 
euphemisms like --enhanced interrogation techniques.‖ 
1436. Chad Westerland, (Arizona political science professor), AMERICAN 
JOURNAL OF POLITICAL SCIENCE, July 21, 2010, retrieved April 14, 2015 from JSTOR. Scholars and journalists alike spilt much ink over Hopwood, as well as decisions by other courts overturning well-established Supreme Court precedents --  cases such as the Fourth Circuit's United States v. Dickerson (1999), holding that states under its supervision need not follow Miranda v. Arizona (1966); and the Missouri Supreme Court's overruling of Stanford v. Kentucky (1989) in Simmons v. Roper (2003). And, yet, these decisions are merely the most striking instances of a more general phenomenon, lower court deviation from earlier precedents set by a higher court -- a phenomenon that can take far subtler forms (e.g., distinguishing or limiting precedents). Indeed, as one observer noted well over half a century ago, --[Many] precedents have been rejected through the stratagem of distinguishment; others have been the subject of conscious judicial oversight. As a consequence, judicial discretion among ‗inferior' judges is not so confined and limited as legal 
theorists would have it.‖ 
1437. Chad Westerland, (Arizona political science professor), AMERICAN 
JOURNAL OF POLITICAL SCIENCE, July 21, 2010, retrieved April 14, 2015 from JSTOR. This observation raises a question that, depending on one's perspective, may be posed two different ways: Why do lower courts defy higher court precedent, or, given the minute percentage of lower court cases that are heard and reversed (currently well under 1%), why do lower courts comply with higher court precedent? Scholarly attempts to address these questions take several forms. One line of inquiry seeks to identify the circumstances that lead to deviations, subtle or overt. Baum (1978), for example, suggests that lower courts will be less responsive to the U.S. Supreme Court in controversial civil liberties cases, and that the clarity of the precedent, the perceived legitimacy of the Court's ruling, and perception by lower court judges of the chances of review also affect the likelihood of compliance (see also Canon and Johnson 1998). Another has focused on socialization and conformity to legal culture as the critical causal mechanism. Robert Cover's (1975) noted study of the enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act by abolitionist judges, for example, emphasizes the moral quandary posed by the judges' twin commitments to abolition and the rule of law. 
1438. Mint Press News, Oct. 15, 2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from 
http://www.mintpressnews.com/federal-courts-at-brink-of-collapse-due-to-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.mintpressnews.com/federal-courts-at-brink-of-collapse-due-to-]
shutdown/170562/. We don't exert the kind of control to keep up resources to match the need,‖ said Richard Roberts, the chief judge of the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia. --We don't have ultimately any authority to set appropriations Congress decides on. We do not necessarily get to decide what the White House 
sends to [the Office of Management and Budget] and to Congress. We can't go out 
and stir up constituents to do talking for us. Structurally, there's a bit of an imbalance.‖ A common mentality in the Republican Party that the court is being controlled by --advocate judges‖ has not helped in convincing the party to preserve judicial budgets. While it is unfair to say that this is the primary reason why the judiciary is often an afterthought in budget negotiations, it helps to explain  --  in part, along with the fact that the court is typically not engaged in public political discussions  --  why court budget cuts tend to be underreported. Yet their effects are clear to see. The courts are increasingly being challenged to find ways to keep their 
doors open without impairing access to justice and endangering the public safety at a 
whole. 


1439. Andrew Cohen, (Atlantic contributing editor), THE ATLANTIC, July 12, 2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/]2013/07/how-the-sequester-is-holding-up-our-legal-system/277704/. Included below are the comments of several sitting federal trial judges who expressed concern to me not just about the cost-cutting that impacts their courtrooms now but also about the profound separation-of-powers principles implicated by the lingering political 
deadlock in Washington. The sequester, in other words, represents an assault by the 
legislative and executive branches upon core judicial functions. And if it lasts much longer, if the next fiscal budget is impacted, the sequester will strip Americans of their right to both serve upon and to be served by juries. The Administrative Office of the United States already has indicated that it may be forced to eliminate civil jury trials in the month of September - a whole month without federal civil trials anywhere in America! --If sufficient funding is not provided to the courts,‖ 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals Judge Julia Gibbons bluntly told lawmakers in March, --we cannot provide the people of the United States the type of justice system that has been 
a hallmark of our liberty throughout our nation's history.‖ The sad truth is, however; 
few of the nation's political leaders, including the former constitutional scholar who now inhabits the White House, seem to care. 
1440. Thomas Susman, (Government Affairs Office director), AMERICAN BAR 
ASSOCIATION, Oct. 29, 2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.american 
bar.org/content/dam/aba/uncategorized/GAO/2013oct29_judgeshiph_l.authcheckdam 
.pdf. The negative consequences of too few judges have been exacerbated by the 
across-the-board budget cuts mandated by sequestration this fiscal year. Staff layoffs 
and furloughs and reductions in services and operating hours implemented in courts across the country in response to sequestration have made it even more difficult for courts with too few judges to keep up with caseloads and deliver timely justice. The combination of too few judges and insufficient funding is diminishing the ability of our federal courts to serve the people and deliver timely justice. 
1441. Katie Peters, (Center for American Progress analyst), CENTER FOR 
AMERICAN PROGRESS, Feb. 27, 2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/general/news/2013/02/27/54926/sequestrati on-and-the-federal-judiciary/. 6th Circuit Judge Julia Gibbons (George W. Bush appointee), Chair of the Committee on the Budget of the Judicial Conference of the United States said: --[A] reduction of this magnitude would cripple the operation of the federal Judiciary and our constitutional mission would be compromised due to these sudden, arbitrary budget cuts.‖ Laurel Bellows, president of the American Bar Association said: --Withering court funding when our economy is emerging from the worst economic disaster since the Great Depression would cause costly delays that 
would sap resources and prevent businesses from investing in their communities. 
Commerce thrives on the certainty that our courts provide. Keeping the courthouse 
doors open is essential for our nation's recovery.‖ 
1442. Environmental News Service, Sept. 2, 2013 retrieved April 14, 2015 from 
http://ens-newswire.com/2013/08/07/alaska-judge-validates-shells-arctic-oil-spill-  [HYPERLINK: http://ens-newswire.com/2013/08/07/alaska-judge-validates-shells-arctic-oil-spill-]
plan/. The decision comes in a lawsuit filed by a coalition of conservation organizations made up of the Alaska Wilderness League, Center for Biological Diversity, Greenpeace, National Audubon Society, Natural Resources Defense Council, Ocean Conservancy, Oceana, Pacific Environment, Resisting Environmental 
Destruction on Indigenous Lands, and Sierra Club. Earthjustice, a nonprofit 
environmental law firm, represented the organizations. --We can all agree that we want oil companies to have sufficient resources and realistic plans to cleanup an oil spill,‖ said Earthjustice Attorney Holly Harris on Tuesday. --Yesterday, the first court to address the issue said the spill plans were sufficient, but this is only the beginning of the effort to define the obligations to address oil spill prevention and response, 
especially in remote, isolated areas like the Arctic Ocean.‖ 
1443. Environmental News Service, Sept. 2, 2013 retrieved April 14, 2015 from 
http://ens-newswire.com/2013/08/07/alaska-judge-validates-shells-arctic-oil-spill-  [HYPERLINK: http://ens-newswire.com/2013/08/07/alaska-judge-validates-shells-arctic-oil-spill-]
plan/. The groups say this court case is just a --first step‖ and they have no intention of 
abandoning their objections to Arctic drilling. --We brought this case to ensure that industry and regulators meet the law's requirements to ask tough questions and reach defensible positions before companies are allowed to drill - and to ensure that operators are prepared to mount an effective cleanup in the event of a spill,‖ the groups said. --The court's decision is a setback, but we will continue to push for 
responsible planning and stringent enforcement of legal protections.‖ 
1444. Ronald O'Rourke, (CRS naval affairs specialist) CONGRESSIONAL 
RESEARCH SERVICE, June 15, 2012 retrieved May 2, 2015 from http://www.fas. 
org/sgp/crs/misc/R41153.pdf. No oil spill is entirely benign. Even a relatively minor 
spill, depending on the timing and location, can cause significant harm to individual organisms and entire populations. Regarding aquatic spills, marine mammals, birds, bottom-dwelling and intertidal species, and organisms in early developmental stages -- eggs or larvae -- are especially vulnerable. However, the effects of oil spills can vary greatly. Oil spills can cause impacts over a range of time scales, from only a few days to several years, or even decades in some cases. 
1445. Ronald O'Rourke, (CRS naval affairs specialist) CONGRESSIONAL 
RESEARCH SERVICE, June 15, 2012 retrieved May 2, 2015 from http://www.fas. org/sgp/crs/misc/R41153.pdf. Conditions in the Arctic may have implications for 
toxicological effects that are not yet understood. For example, oil spills on permafrost 
may persist in an ecosystem for relatively long periods of time, potentially harming plant life through their root systems. Moreover, little is known about the effects of oil spills on species that are unique to the Arctic, particularly, species' abilities to thrive in a cold environment and the effect temperature has on toxicity. The effects of oil spills in high latitude, cold ocean environments may last longer and cause greater damage than expected. Some recent studies have found that oil spills in lower latitudes have persisted for longer than initially expected, thus raising the concern that the persistence of oil in the Arctic may be understated. In terms of wildlife, 
population recovery may take longer in the Arctic because many of the species have 
longer life spans and reproduce at a slower rate. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	11 3 
 
 
 
1446. Nicholas Cunningham, (Arctic Institute fellow), ARTIC INSTITUTE, July 19, 2012 retrieved May 2, 2015 from http://www.thearcticinstitute.org/2012/07/offshore-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.thearcticinstitute.org/2012/07/offshore-]oil-drilling-in-us-arctic-part_19.html. The lack of scientific evidence presents critical concerns about further oil and gas development in the Arctic. The U.S. Geological Survey released a report in June 2011, detailing the gaps in scientific knowledge on the effects of an oil spill in the Arctic. In particular, the USGS report notes that --[n]umerous efforts have been unsuccessful at developing a transparent, quantitative, and comprehensive method to assess cumulative impacts.‖ The report issued three recommendations, --(1) large-scale synthesis of data and information, (2) enhanced dialog and collaborative science planning, and (3) a more transparent and inclusive 
planning and decision-making process.‖ 
1447. Nicholas Cunningham, (Arctic Institute fellow), ARTIC INSTITUTE, July 19, 
2012 retrieved May 2, 2015 from http://www.thearcticinstitute.org/2012/07/offshore-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.thearcticinstitute.org/2012/07/offshore-]oil-drilling-in-us-arctic-part_19.html. However, the acquisition of scientific knowledge on the Arctic has been relegated to a secondary priority when oil and gas development are in question. When BOEMRE submitted the supplemental environmental impact statement to comply with the court order that allowed Lease 
Sale 193 to proceed, BOEMRE ostensibly agreed that science should guide 
permitting decisions, but its submission allowed Shell to move to the next phase of permitting. Oceana, a marine conservation group, criticized BOEMRE and its SEIS, noting that despite submitting additional forecasts on the impact of a --very large oil spill‖ on the environment, the models were simply conjecture. Literally nothing has changed about the general lack of scientific knowledge that exists on effects of Arctic ecosystems from oil drilling. 
1448. Nicholas Cunningham, (Arctic Institute fellow), ARTIC INSTITUTE, July 19, 
2012 retrieved May 2, 2015 from http://www.thearcticinstitute.org/2012/07/offshore-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.thearcticinstitute.org/2012/07/offshore-]oil-drilling-in-us-arctic-part_19.html. Additionally, the impacts of hydrocarbon releases in the marine environment have been shown to cause detrimental impacts on reproductive health, immunological and neurological functioning, as well as higher incidences of mortality for marine wildlife. Contaminants from oil and gas drilling are also believed to travel higher up on the food chain, ultimately having cascading effects for marine ecosystems. Shell's 2012 exploration plans include drilling exploratory wells in the Chukchi Sea, where bowhead whales migrate to during the spring months. 
1449. Michael Pravica, (UNLV physics professor), USA TODAY, April 24, 2012 
retrieved May 2, 2015 from http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/opinion/  [HYPERLINK: http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/opinion/]
letters/story/2012-04-24/Ted-Danson-oil-Deepwater-Horizon/54513946/1). There are a few critical points not mentioned in the USA TODAY editorial on the BP oil spill that should have been addressed. First of all, deep water drilling represents a --brave new world‖ of oil exploration and novel technology as humans probe depths of water, oil and rock that sustain thousands of atmospheres of pressure. At these levels, the technology used to drill and extract oil can easily fail as we approach the yield strengths of many of the confining materials subjected to extreme conditions. There is also a high chance of significant fracture of the ocean/sea floor in drilling and hole erosion from gushing, hot and high pressure oil (along with particulates and other 
mineral-rich fluids) that could make repair nearly impossible and could permanently 
poison our waters. 
1450. Arne Jernelov, (former International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis 
director), PROJECT SYNDICATE, Jan. 17, 2013 retrieved May 2, 2015 from 
http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/the-risks-of-offshore-arctic-oil-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/the-risks-of-offshore-arctic-oil-]
drilling-by-arne-jernelov. There are several oil-related environmental risks specific to the Arctic Ocean. For starters, there is the weather and climate. Even if the Arctic Ocean becomes ice-free in the summer, most of the year it is not, and icebergs from melting glaciers will become more common and possibly larger. This, together with 
frequent, powerful, and icy storms, increases the likelihood of blowouts and other 
spills. 
1451. Arne Jernelov, (former International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis 
director), PROJECT SYNDICATE, Jan. 17, 2013 retrieved May 2, 2015 from 
http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/the-risks-of-offshore-arctic-oil-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/the-risks-of-offshore-arctic-oil-]
drilling-by-arne-jernelov. Then there are the problems associated with remoteness. The BP disaster in 2010 happened in the best possible place in terms of that appear on short notice nearby resources for capping a blowout: the Gulf of Mexico contains the world's largest concentration of oil companies, subcontractors, petroleum engineers, 
equipment, workshops, etc. Yet it took three months to cap the Macondo well. In the 
Arctic, all of those resources are thousands of kilometers away. In the Gulf, the cleanup operations engaged tens of thousands of people in Mississippi and nearby US states. Where are such people to be found in the Arctic? Furthermore, in warm waters, most of the oil and its effects largely dissipate within five years. In cold waters, however, recovery takes much longer, as the Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska in 1989 demonstrated. The rule of thumb that chemical and biochemical processes double in speed with each increase of ten degrees Celsius is a reasonable approximation here, too. Thus, processes that take five years in the Gulf of Mexico 
would take more than 20 in the Arctic. 
1452. Arne Jernelov, (former International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis 
director), PROJECT SYNDICATE, Jan. 17, 2013 retrieved May 2, 2015 from 
http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/the-risks-of-offshore-arctic-oil-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/the-risks-of-offshore-arctic-oil-]
drilling-by-arne-jernelov. Meanwhile, in the low biodiversity ecosystems of the Arctic, with their simple food webs, so-called cascading effects are more pronounced than in temperate or warm regions. The demise of one species or trophic level (which contains organisms performing the same function in the food chain), leads to changes in others in a rapid sequence that is difficult to foresee. The new US rules for offshore oil operations in the Arctic - which forced Shell to postpone drilling until next year - 
are certainly stricter than the old rules, and will reduce the risk of a blowout. But, if 
one occurs, the only reliable way to stop it and cap the well is to drill a relief well. That takes months in the best of circumstances; it could take a year or more in the Arctic. 


1453. Brandon Bartels, (GWU political science professor), AMERICAN JOURNAL OF POLITICAL SCIENCE, January 2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from Sage. Is the Supreme Court a --political‖ institution? ‗We close with this overarching question, which we believe is crucial for understanding the publics relationship with the Court. Does the public believe the Court is --just another political institution.‖ like Congress or the presidency? An institution for which legitimacy is granted or withheld on the basis of ideological preferences vis-a-vis perceptions of the Court's policymaking can certainly be considered --political.‖ While a good share of the public shows ideological agreement with the Court, resulting in sizable levels of legitimacy, as times change, that agreement could turn into disagreement, resulting in lower legitimacy among those who had previously shown high legitimacy. As the results of this study make clear, the Court's legitimacy in the mass public is significantly influenced by individuals' perceived ideological disagreement with the Court's policymaking. Legitimacy, in this sense, is --politicized‖ in the mass public, which questions many of the core tenets of the legitimacy concept. There are certainly many more questions to ask regarding the political and ideological foundations of legitimacy. For instance, what other political and ideological factors shape legitimacy orientations? We believe our study has produced a significant contribution that will hopefully provide a basis for future work regarding the extent to which Supreme Court legitimacy rests on ideological and political foundations. 
1454. Clive Schofield, (Director of Research, Australian Centre for Ocean 
Resources), UOW BLOGS, March 10, 2014 retrieved May 2, 2015 from 
https://www.uowblogs.com/globalchallenges/2014/03/10/the-threats-facing-our- 
precious-oceans/. The oceans are critical to the global environment and human survival in numerous ways - they are vital to the global nutrient cycling, represent a key repository and supporter of biological diversity on a world scale and play a 
fundamental role in driving the global atmospheric system. Coastal and marine 
environments support and sustain key habitats and living resources, notably fisheries and aquaculture. These resources continue to provide a critical source of food for hundreds of millions of people. 
1455. John Charles Kunich, (Rogers Williams law professor), COLUMBIA 
JOURNAL OF ENVIRONMENTAL LAW, 2005, retrieved May 2, 2015 from Lexis. On the other hand, there is an unimaginable cost from failing to preserve the marine hotspots if they contain numerous species of high value at great risk of extinction. We could cost ourselves and our posterity untold advancements in medicine, therapies, genetic resources, nutrients, ecosystem services, and other areas, including perhaps a cure to a global health threat that might not materialize until centuries from now . . . truly a --grave error‖ of the first order. But if we sit on the sidelines and fail to invest in hotspots preservation, and we --get lucky‖ (few species, low value, small extinction risk), our only gain is in the form of saving the money and effort we could have spent on the hotspots. Even if this amounts to several billion dollars a year, it is a small benefit compared to the incalculably catastrophic losses we could suffer if we guess 
wrong in betting on the inaction option. [ellipsis in original] 
1456. John Charles Kunich, (Rogers Williams law professor), COLUMBIA 
JOURNAL OF ENVIRONMENTAL LAW, 2005, retrieved May 2, 2015 from Lexis. Therefore, the results that are linked to high, rather than low, values of each of the three variables are far more probable than the converse outcomes. In terms of probabilities, it is much more likely that either a --first order grave error‖ or --first order jackpot‖ will occur than a --lucky wager‖ or an --unused insurance‖ result. In fact, all of the combinations with either two or three --high‖ values of the variables are significantly more probable that any of the combinations with two or three --low‖ variable values. This means that the tilt in favor of betting on the hotspots is much more pronounced than is apparent from a cursory glance at the Decision Matrix. The extreme results are far likelier to fall in favor of hotspots preservation than the opposite. 
1457. Robin Craig (Florida State environmental program associate dean), 
UNIVERSITY OF THE PACIFIC MCGEORGE LAW REVIEW, Winter 2003, retrieved May 2, 2015 from Lexis. Biodiversity and ecosystem function arguments for conserving marine ecosystems also exist, just as they do for terrestrial ecosystems, but these arguments have thus far rarely been raised in political debates. For example, besides significant tourism values - the most economically valuable ecosystem service coral reefs provide, worldwide - coral reefs protect against storms and dampen other environmental fluctuations, services worth more than ten times the reefs' value for food production. Waste treatment is another significant, non- extractive ecosystem function that intact coral reef ecosystems provide. More generally, --ocean ecosystems play a major role in the global geochemical cycling of all the elements that represent the basic building blocks of living organisms, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur, as well as other less abundant but necessary elements.‖ In a very real and direct sense, therefore, human degradation of marine ecosystems impairs the planet's ability to support life. 
1458. Robin Craig (Florida State environmental program associate dean), 
UNIVERSITY OF THE PACIFIC MCGEORGE LAW REVIEW, Winter 2003, retrieved May 2, 2015 from Lexis. Most ecologists agree that the complexity of interactions and degree of interrelatedness among component species is higher on coral reefs than in any other marine environment. This implies that the ecosystem functioning that produces the most highly valued components is also complex and that many otherwise insignificant species have strong effects on sustaining the rest of the reef system. Thus, maintaining and restoring the biodiversity of marine ecosystems is critical to maintaining and restoring the ecosystem services that they provide. Non-use biodiversity values for marine ecosystems have been calculated in the wake of marine disasters, like the Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska. Similar calculations could derive preservation values for marine wilderness. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	11 4 
 
 
 
1459. Mint Press News, Oct. 15, 2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]mintpressnews.com/federal-courts-at-brink-of-collapse-due-to-shutdown/170562/. 
This represents a constitutional crisis unlike any other the nation has ever faced. Simply put, one branch of government  --  the Congress, in this case  --  is, by means of denying funding, preventing another branch  --  the judiciary  --  from operating. In doing so, the entire underpinning of the government  --  the constitutional distribution of power  --  could become undone should the courts lose the financial capability to operate. --The Constitution tells us what we have to do and we can't control our workload. It walks in the door, whether we're funded or not funded,‖ said U.S. District Court Chief Judge Loretta Preska in New York. Preska has placed all civil cases except those already in trial on hold at the request of the U.S. Attorney. Preska said that the roughly 450 district court employees that serve the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York will work the criminal caseload, even after the funding runs out. Courts in San Francisco, Philadelphia and St. Louis have also indicated that their employees will work even without funding to pay them. 
1460. Julie Makinen, (LA Times reporter), LA TIMES, Feb. 18, 2015 retrieved April 
18, 2015 from http://www.latimes.com/world/asia/la-fg-china-new-year-20150218-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.latimes.com/world/asia/la-fg-china-new-year-20150218-]story.html#page=1. But the corporate opportunism also coincides with  --  and is being multiplied by  --  a campaign by the Chinese Communist Party to tout Chinese New Year around the globe as vehicle for bolstering the country's still-limited soft power. Since 2010, the country's Ministry of Culture has poured manpower into 
organizing myriad Chinese New Year events worldwide, in partnership with overseas 
business entities and cultural organizations. Under President Xi Jinping, who took power in late 2012, those efforts have taken on even greater urgency. Last year, Xi exhorted cadres to work on enhancing China's soft power. 
1461. Julie Makinen, (LA Times reporter), LA TIMES, Feb. 18, 2015 retrieved April 
18, 2015 from http://www.latimes.com/world/asia/la-fg-china-new-year-20150218-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.latimes.com/world/asia/la-fg-china-new-year-20150218-]story.html#page=1. The Ministry of Culture's --Happy Chinese New Year‖ program is a prime example of China's soft-power push, also exemplified by the global growth of Confucius Institutes, government-sponsored programs to promote Chinese 
language and culture. Under the rubric of the New Year campaign this year, 
authorities have undertaken such eclectic efforts as helping to stage a Chinese cultural knowledge quiz in Suva, Fiji, and sending a puppet troupe from Shaanxi province to Missoula, Mont. They are helping to arrange performances by the Shenzhen Symphony Orchestra in Stanford, San Diego and San Jose, and for the second year in a row have arranged to illuminate the Empire State Building with red and gold lights. On Tuesday, a major Chinese New Year fireworks show was held over the Hudson River, choreographed to music by the China National Symphony Orchestra. The ministry refused to disclose how much it has spent on its efforts, but the number of 
events has soared. In 2010, authorities said they organized 65 activities in 42 
countries; this year, the government tallied 900 events in 119 nations. 
1462. Nathan Gardels, (Huffington Post staff writer), HUFFINGTON POST, June 16, 
2014 retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/nathan-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/nathan-]gardels/china-power-confrontation_b_5496816.html. There are many opportunities to work with the United States on climate change even if Washington is paralyzed. As President Obama acknowledged in his own carbon reduction plan announced recently, the U.S. is a federal system with very large states that can determine their own environmental policies. China has provinces that are as large as several European countries. For example, California and China have already initiated 
cooperation agreements on pollution reduction in its cities and on climate change, 
including pilot projects on trading carbon permits with California, the world's largest market for such permits. In November, California Governor Jerry Brown is planning to host a meeting at Sunnylands - where Presidents Obama and Xi met - to bring together governors from China and the U.S. to develop a common agenda on climate change and pollution reduction at the sub-national level. 
1463. Oliver Stuenkel, (FGV IR professor), POST WESTERN WORLD, Feb. 14, 
2015 retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://www.postwesternworld.com/2015/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.postwesternworld.com/2015/]02/14/should-china-about/. Rather producing new insights about the rise of China, 
applying the idea of soft power to Asia's leading economy will show the concept's 
limitations. While Nye may initially have argued that soft and hard power are entirely independent from each other, a closer analysis shows that the two go together. If the Chinese economy continues to maintain its dynamism, its attractiveness is almost assured - provided that it can maintain domestic political stability, avoid environmental disaster, abstain from engaging in regional wars, and not break too many international rules. In fact, the Chinese government's soft power strategy seems to have a much more moderate aim, as Shogo Suzuki explains in this chapter: to reduce global anxiety about the rise of China. Indeed, the Chinese government has 
eagerly embraced the concept of soft power, but its strategy amounts to little more 
than an old-fashioned propaganda campaign, or public and cultural diplomacy to improve China's image abroad - hence, no real need for a new term. This does not mean that economic and military power are the only types of power, quite to the contrary. Public and cultural diplomacy, the capacity to set the agenda in the global debate, and the capacity to attract foreign talent are extremely important. Rather, it questions whether soft power is a helpful way to describe them. 
1464. Oliver Stuenkel, (FGV IR professor), POST WESTERN WORLD, Feb. 14, 
2015 retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://www.postwesternworld.com/2015/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.postwesternworld.com/2015/]
02/14/should-china-about/. Many of the arguments used by analysts (like 
Shambaugh) about why China's soft power is limited - often made from a Western- centric perspective - are bound to weaken once its economic weight increases. It is true that China currently has few friends - but that will change if China is increasingly able to economically support a growing number of countries or provide them with security guarantees. In the same way, the alliances many states will entertain with the United States may weaken, as seen already in places like South Africa, Russia, Venezuela and Argentina. 


1465. David Greene, (Electronic Frontier Foundation researcher), ELECTRONIC FRONTIER FOUNDATION, May 28, 2014 retrieved May 2, 2015 from https:// www.eff.org/deeplinks/2014/05/unnecessary-and-disproportionate-how-nsa-violates-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2014/05/unnecessary-and-disproportionate-how-nsa-violates-]international-human-rights. More broadly, the United States justifies the lawfulness of its communications surveillance by reference to distinctions that, considering modern communications technology, are irrelevant to truly protecting privacy in a 
modern society. The US relies on the outmoded distinction between --content‖ and 
--metadata,‖ falsely contending that the latter does not reveal private facts about an individual. The US also contends that the collection of data is not surveillance -- it argues, contrary to both international law and the Principles, that an individual's privacy rights are not infringed as long as her communications data are not analyzed by a human being. It's clear that the practice of digital surveillance by the United States has overrun the bounds of human rights standards. What our paper hopes to show is exactly where the country has crossed the line, and how its own politicians and the international community might rein it back. 
1466. Zak Newman, (ACLU Washington Legislative Office), ACLU, April 17, 2014 
retrieved May 2, 2015 from https://www.aclu.org/blog/nsa-surveillance-unravels- 
international-law?redirect=blog/national-security-human-rights/nsa-surveillance- 
unravels-international-law. The NSA's surveillance programs fly in the face of that commitment. And, more critically, they violate international law. A recent ACLU and Amnesty International submission to the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board (PCLOB) explains that Section 702 of FISA -- enacted by Congress in 2008 to codify the Bush administration's warrantless wiretapping program -- authorizes surveillance that is not only unconstitutional but that violates the long-established human right to 
privacy. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), which the 
U.S. ratified in 1992, has four primary requirements relevant to national surveillance 
programs. 
1467. Zak Newman, (ACLU Washington Legislative Office), ACLU, April 17, 2014 
retrieved May 2, 2015 from https://www.aclu.org/blog/nsa-surveillance-unravels- 
international-law?redirect=blog/national-security-human-rights/nsa-surveillance- 
unravels-international-law. That's not just the position of civil liberties and human rights groups. In its recent Concluding Observations on U.S. compliance with the 
ICCPR, the U.N. Human Rights Committee agreed: The Committee is concerned 
about the surveillance  under Section 702  conducted through PRISM. . . . The Committee is concerned that until recently, judicial interpretations of FISA and rulings of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) have largely been kept secret, thus not allowing affected persons to know the law with sufficient precision. 
 The Committee is concerned that the current system of oversight of the activities 
of the NSA fails to effectively protect the rights of those affected. [ellipses in 
original] 
1468. Zak Newman, (ACLU Washington Legislative Office), ACLU, April 17, 2014 
retrieved May 2, 2015 from https://www.aclu.org/blog/nsa-surveillance-unravels- 
international-law?redirect=blog/national-security-human-rights/nsa-surveillance- 
unravels-international-law. First, disrespect for privacy rights around the world is inconsistent with U.S. policy goals and rhetoric. As the President's NSA Review Group stated in its report: --The United States should be a leader in championing the protection by all nations of fundamental human rights, including the right of privacy, which is central to human dignity.‖ Second, NSA surveillance programs have already created observable --chilling effects‖ for both citizens and noncitizens - they actually 
change the way we behave. Recent studies show that knowledge of the government's 
omnipresent collection programs has shifted the way people conduct their digital lives, causing us to be more selective about which search terms we use and what services we connect to. As our submission notes, this stifles Internet freedom, a long- recognized policy objective of the current administration. 
1469. Zak Newman, (ACLU Washington Legislative Office), ACLU, April 17, 2014 
retrieved May 2, 2015 from https://www.aclu.org/blog/nsa-surveillance-unravels- 
international-law?redirect=blog/national-security-human-rights/nsa-surveillance- 
unravels-international-law. Finally, NSA surveillance undercuts international human rights law that protects Americans, too. U.S. disregard for noncitizens' right to 
privacy gives the green light to other governments to indiscriminately collect and 
surveil Americans' most personal data. For the protection of its own citizens' privacy, the U.S. must respect the rights of noncitizens. Americans understand that the surveillance programs exposed by Edward Snowden violate the Constitution, and it has been heartening to witness the protest movement growing in response. But it's important to consider international implications as well. The United States should be setting global standards - not breaking them. 
1470. Grant Gross (IDG News Washington Correspondent), PC WORLD, Oct. 28, 
2013 retrieved May 2, 2015 from http://www.pcworld.com/article/2058560/human-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.pcworld.com/article/2058560/human-]
rights-commission-questions-nsa-surveillance.html. Press reports this year on the 
surveillance programs raise questions about unchecked authority and the effect on freedom of speech, added Frank La Rue, special rapporteur on the freedom of expression at the United Nations. Secret surveillance programs will --inevitably‖ lead to abuses, he said. --What is not permissible, from a human rights point of view, is that those who hold political power or those who are in security agencies . . . decide by themselves, for themselves, what is going be the scope of breaching the right to 
privacy,‖ La Rue said. [ellipsis in original] 
1471. Grant Gross (IDG News Washington Correspondent), PC WORLD, Oct. 28, 
2013 retrieved May 2, 2015 from http://www.pcworld.com/article/2058560/human-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.pcworld.com/article/2058560/human-]
rights-commission-questions-nsa-surveillance.html. The NSA's surveillance of hundreds of millions of foreign telephone calls and Internet communications raises legitimate questions about a global right to privacy, said Alex Abdo, a staff attorney with the ACLU National Security Project. The NSA programs targeting people overseas allow the agency to collect any communication related broadly to foreign intelligence, not just terrorism, he said. The NSA programs' goals are to --make virtually every international communication fair game for surveillance,‖ Abdo said. --Simply put, if every country were to engage in surveillance as unfettered as the 
NSA's, we would soon live in a world of pervasive monitoring.‖ 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	11 5 
 
 
 
1472. Leslie Harris, (Center for Democracy & Technology president), XINDEX, Aug. 6, 2013 retrieved May 2, 2015 from https://www.indexoncensorship.org/ 2013/08/bringing-global-human-rights-into-the-surveillance-debate/. As the letter makes clear, there is great concern from the global community that the recently revealed surveillance program conducted under Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) poses a severe threat to human rights. It rightly notes that the surveillance -- strikes at the heart of global digital communications and severely threatens human rights in the digital age.‖ --The use of unnecessary, disproportionate, and unaccountable extra-territorial surveillance not only violates rights to privacy and human dignity, but also threatens the fundamental rights to freedom of thought, opinion and expression, and association that are at the center of any democratic practice. Such surveillance must be scrutinized through ample, deep, and transparent debate. Interference with the human rights of citizens by any 
government, their own or foreign, is unacceptable.‖ 
1473. Melissa Hooper, (Human Rights First international law attorney), NEW YOUR 
LAW JOURNAL, Feb. 27, 2015 retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://www.newyork 
lawjournal.com/id=1202719078471/US-Must-Affirm-Leadership-Role-on-Human- 
Rights?slreturn=20150318160429. To reestablish its credibility on the international stage following things like the torture report and more than a decade of due process violations in Guantánamo, the United States must begin more seriously enforcing its 
own international legal obligations, which are constitutionally-binding law, in its own 
courts. The United States once positioned itself as a human rights leader, and that moral authority gave it considerable soft power around the world. U.S. leadership was instrumental in creating the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the United Nations, and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The significant due process components of the U.S. justice system have been used as the basis for rule-of-law reforms in numerous other countries. The United States still has among the broadest frameworks for protection for free speech and freedom of religion in the world. 
1474. Melissa Hooper, (Human Rights First international law attorney), NEW YOUR 
LAW JOURNAL, Feb. 27, 2015 retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://www.newyork 
lawjournal.com/id=1202719078471/US-Must-Affirm-Leadership-Role-on-Human- 
Rights?slreturn=20150318160429. Human rights law is thriving around the world. Courts in Canada, Latin America, Europe, India and South Africa, among others, are developing bodies of jurisprudence that incorporate human rights law and citing international and comparative law in their decisions. International tribunals, such as the International Court of Justice, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights and the European Court of Human Rights, hold states accountable to protect refugees, to 
adopt mechanisms to prosecute torture, and to provide humane conditions for 
prisoners. As the rest of the world is taking these steps forward, however gradual, the United States must not allow itself to step backward and lose its moral credibility by backing down from its international legal commitments. Human rights law is only as irrelevant as we allow it to be. The United States is still a leader on the world stage, and what it does matters. If we want to hold other states accountable for human rights violations and promote the global legitimacy of human rights, we must honor our own international legal obligations and recognize that they are an integral part of the law of the land. 
1475. Sheng Ding, (Bloomsberg political science professor), ASIAN 
PERSPECTIVE, October 2012, retrieved April 18, 2015 from Proquest. Not all human rights values and practices typically endorsed by Western states are automatically accepted elsewhere. It would be wrong to attempt to universalize Western-style democratic practices or to employ US human rights values to judge other states' soft-power appeal. However, all governments are obligated to defend and promote whatever they believe are essential human rights values. Their performance in this respect is widely accepted as an important part of their soft- power appeal. Therefore, a judgment on the appeal of Chinese softpower should be made on the basis of Beijing's performance in defending and promoting its own human rights values domestically and abroad. 
1476. Chen Guangchen, (Chinese human rights activist), HUFFINGTON POST, June 
14, 2013 retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/chen-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/chen-]
guangcheng/china-trade-human-rights_b_3443081.html. The recent revelations over 
U.S. online surveillance, as well as longstanding issues such as Guantanamo Bay and 
drone strikes, all give ammunition to the Chinese regime, which now publishes its own highly critical annual human rights reports on the United States. The failure of Western countries to condemn the human rights abuses of close allies such as Saudi Arabia and Bahrain also gives rise to accusations of double standards. Such hypocrisy must be addressed if the West is to be truly credible in its efforts to promote human rights abroad. 
1477. Sheng Ding, (Bloomsberg political science professor), ASIAN 
PERSPECTIVE, October 2012, retrieved April 18, 2015 from Proquest. Media coverage of Chinese human rights issues has been particularly intense in recent years. From alleged Beijing-sponsored cyberattacks on Western corporations such as Google to Beijing's effort to blackmail other governments to keep them from attending the Nobel Peace Prize ceremony to the infamous Great Firewall censorship system, Beijing's sensitivity to and defensiveness about its human rights record has raised further doubts about the appeal of Chinese softpower. This result is not surprising since, according to Joseph Nye, human rights are an essential part of softpower, as in the case of the United States. It has been widely accepted that how a government defends basic human rights is an important part of its softpower, although no globally agreed-upon definition of essential human rights exists. China's human rights record, which has attracted criticism for many years, has become increasingly important to the appeal of Chinese softpower. 
1478. Sheng Ding, (Bloomsberg political science professor), ASIAN 
PERSPECTIVE, October 2012, retrieved April 18, 2015 from Proquest. Beijing's softpower-related foreign-policy efforts and its consistently controversial human rights record raise an important question: Are human rights the Achilles' heel of Chinese softpower? This article attempts to analyze the appeal of Chinese softpower from the perspective of Beijing's performance in defending and promoting its own human rights values. First, the article discusses the conceptual connection between Chinese human rights and the appeal of Chinese softpower. Second, it analyzes the appeal of Chinese softpower by examining China's domestic human rights record. Third, it examines the appeal of Chinese softpower by examining China's participation in the international human rights (IHR) regime. 


1479. Gary Rawnsley, (Aberystwyth international politics professor), WWPDIC, Dec. 16, 2014 retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://wwwpdic.blogspot.com/2014/  [HYPERLINK: http://wwwpdic.blogspot.com/2014/]
12/lipstick-on-pig-americas-soft-power-is.html. Can the US recover its credibility? Yes it can. By following a clear communication strategy, the US can salvage its soft power without the present government having to distance itself in an unconvincing way from its predecessor. And the way to do this is by focusing more on the process of how the world came to know about these terrible acts and less on the acts themselves, as well as by outlining how the US intends to deal with the consequences. 
1480. Tim Kumpe, (Tamkang International Affairs PhD candidate), ASIA TIMES, 
June 6, 2014 retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://www.atimes.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.atimes.com/]
atimes/China/CHIN-01-060614.html. So far, Beijing's un-smart power modus operandi has not been very beneficial in winning friends throughout the region. China's actions didn't attract but antagonized. On balance sheet, its attempts to gain power have backfired and translated into losses of both hard and soft power. Against the backdrop of heightened tensions in the East and South China seas, countries of the Asia-Pacific region are increasingly troubled by Chinese expansion. Consequently, whereas China lost much of its soft power charm, the US and Japan gained in terms of credibility, trust, and attractiveness. Beijing's loss is 
Washington's, Tokyo's, and its allies' and friends' gain. 
1481. Nicholas Dynon, (Macquarie PhD candidate), THE DIPLOMAT, June 19, 
2013 retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://thediplomat.com/2013/06/soft-power-a-u-s-  [HYPERLINK: http://thediplomat.com/2013/06/soft-power-a-u-s-]china-battleground/. But to shape the world in non-Western ways means engaging in a soft power battlespace against an incumbent who already holds the high ground. Liu comments that in regions deeply influenced by Western cultures, political systems and values, the --latecomer‖ China is considered a --dissident force.‖ Under such circumstances, --it is rather difficult for China to attract Western countries with its own political and cultural charisma, let alone to replace their positions.‖ According to 
this and similar viewpoints, China's difficulty in projecting soft power across the 
world is in part due to the way the U.S. leverages its own soft power. Wu Jianmin, the former president of China's Foreign Affairs University, puts the point well when explaining that U.S. soft power is driven by the imperative of --maintaining US 
hegemony in changing the world, of letting the world listen to the United States.‖ 
1482. Chin-Hao Huang, (USC IR PhD candidate), THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF 
ASIAN RESEARCH, January 2013, retrieved April 18, 2015 from 
http://dornsife.usc.edu/assets/sites/451/docs/Huang_FINAL_China_Soft_Power_and_  [HYPERLINK: http://dornsife.usc.edu/assets/sites/451/docs/Huang_FINAL_China_Soft_Power_and_]
Status.pdf. In the past, the United States has been called a soft-power superpower in 
East Asia and beyond, but many wonder whether the United States is losing this title 
to China, at least in East Asia, because of declining U.S. attention to the region and resentment of recent U.S. foreign policies. There is much recent literature indicating a causal relationship between a simultaneous and supposed decline of U.S. soft power and the rise of Chinese soft power. China's soft power has been called --the most potent weapon in Beijing's foreign policy arsenal,‖ but there remain key questions surrounding it, such as how potent this weapon has been and how well Beijing has utilized soft power since adopting its --reform and opening‖ policy in 1978. It is clear that China has effectively established itself as a global economic superpower, but can 
the same be said in regard to soft power? 
1483. Ritula Sha, (BBC staff writer), BBC, Nov. 19, 2014 retrieved April 18, 2015 
from http://www.bbc.com/news/world-29536648. So. [HYPERLINK: http://www.bbc.com/news/world-29536648] China is still feared rather than admired by most of its Asian neighbors (not least because of its military or hard power capacity) but over time, who is to say that Beijing's economic success, regardless of its political system, won't win over global admirers? So does soft power really matter? Governments seem to value it even though soft power alone won't prevent wars or silence your critics - although it may help to win support for your point of view. For now, US soft power, remains pre-eminent, America continues to succeed in selling us its culture, its ability to innovate and its way of life. But there 
are competing economic powers and competing ideologies, all demanding to be 
heard, all wanting to persuade you to see it their way. Wielding soft power effectively is set to get more complicated. 
1484. Chin-Hao Huang, (USC IR PhD candidate), THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF 
ASIAN RESEARCH, January 2013, retrieved April 18, 2015 from 
http://dornsife.usc.edu/assets/sites/451/docs/Huang_FINAL_China_Soft_Power_and_  [HYPERLINK: http://dornsife.usc.edu/assets/sites/451/docs/Huang_FINAL_China_Soft_Power_and_]
Status.pdf. China's authoritarian regime is thus the biggest obstacle to its efforts to construct and project soft power. At the same time, if the government decides to take a different tack -- a more constructive approach that embraces multilateralism --  
Chinese soft power could be a positive force multiplier that contributes to peace and 
stability in the region. A widely read and cited article published in Liaowang, a leading CCP publication on foreign affairs, reveals that there are prospects for China being socialized into a less disruptive power that complies with regional and global norms: Compared with past practices, China's diplomacy has indeed displayed a new face. If China's diplomacy before the 1980s stressed safeguarding of national security, and its emphasis from the 1980s to early this century is on the creation of an excellent environment for economic development, then the focus at present is to take a more active part in international affairs and play the role that a responsible power 
should on the basis of satisfying the security and development interests. 
1485. Chin-Hao Huang, (USC IR PhD candidate), THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF 
ASIAN RESEARCH, January 2013, retrieved April 18, 2015 from 
http://dornsife.usc.edu/assets/sites/451/docs/Huang_FINAL_China_Soft_Power_and_  [HYPERLINK: http://dornsife.usc.edu/assets/sites/451/docs/Huang_FINAL_China_Soft_Power_and_]
Status.pdf. The newly minted leadership in Beijing provides China with an opportunity to reset its soft-power approach and the direction of its foreign policy more generally. If the new leadership pursues a different course, Washington should seize on this opportunity to craft an effective response to better manage U.S.-China relations and provide for greater stability in the Asia-Pacific region. For example, strengthening regional alliances and existing security and economic architectures 
could help restrain China's more bellicose tendencies. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	11 6 
 
 
 
1486. Chin-Hao Huang, (USC IR PhD candidate), THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH, January 2013, retrieved April 18, 2015 from 
http://dornsife.usc.edu/assets/sites/451/docs/Huang_FINAL_China_Soft_Power_and_  [HYPERLINK: http://dornsife.usc.edu/assets/sites/451/docs/Huang_FINAL_China_Soft_Power_and_]
Status.pdf. China's soft-power efforts in East Asia -- enabled by its active use of coercive economic and social levers such as aid, investment, and public diplomacy --  have already accrued numerous benefits for the PRC. Some view the failure of the United States to provide immediate assistance to East and Southeast Asian states during the 1997 Asian financial crisis and China's widely publicized refusal to devalue its currency at the time (which would have forced other Asian states to follow suit) as a turning point, causing some in Asia to question which great power was more reliable. China also uses economic aid, and the withdrawal thereof, as a tool of national power, as seen in China's considerable aid efforts in Southeast Asia, as well as in its suspension of $200 million in aid to Vietnam in 2006 after Hanoi invited Taiwan to attend that year's Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit. 
1487. Pavin Chachavalpongpun, (Kyoto Southeast Asian studies professor), 
PRACHATAI ENGLISH, July 20, 2013 retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://prachatai.com/english/node/3647. Thus, [HYPERLINK: http://prachatai.com/english/node/3647] the Nanning conference perfectly responded to the real need behind the image change, through a different approach in dealing with its Southeast Asian neighbors with the use of --soft power‖. More communication and cooperation between people in China and Southeast Asian 
countries was encouraged, as shown in the theme of the conference, --Boosting 
Development through a Peace Deal and Achieving Positive Outcomes through Cooperation‖. Indeed, the Chinese soft power has been increasingly felt in the region. Taking Thailand as an example, successive Thai governments have welcomed China's soft power with arms wide open. Patrick Jory argued that since the Chinese language has been re-introduced into Thailand's schools and universities after a long period of official sanction, Chinese popular culture has been much celebrated, and imported Chinese soap operas have been highly popular. 
1488. John Feffer, (Institute for Policy Studies foreign policy director), THE 


1492. Ivan Eland, (Independent Institute senior fellow), HUFFINGTON POST, Dec. 10, 2013 retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ivan-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ivan-]
eland/stay-out-of-petty-island-_b_4414811.html. One of the most dangerous international disputes that the United States could get dragged into has little importance to U.S. security - the disputes nations have over small islands (some really rocks rising out of the sea) in East Asia. Although any war over these islands would rank right up there with the absurd Falkland Islands war of 1982 between Britain and Argentina over remote, windswept sheep pastures near Antarctica, any conflict in East Asia always has the potential to escalate to nuclear war. And unlike the Falklands war, the United States might be right in the atomic crosshairs. 
1493. Lester Brown, (Earth Policy Institute president), SCIENTISM AMERICAN, 
May 2009, retrieved April 18, 2015 from Ebsco. Failing states are of international concern because they are a source of terrorists, drugs, weapons and refugees, threatening political stability everywhere. Somalia, number one on the 2008 list of failing states, has become a base for piracy. Iraq, number five, is a hotbed for terrorist training. Afghanistan, number seven, is the world's leading supplier of heroin. Following the massive genocide of 1994 in Rwanda, refugees from that troubled state, thousands of armed soldiers among them, helped to destabilize neighboring Democratic Republic of the Congo (number six). Our global civilization depends on a functioning network of politically healthy nation-states to control the spread of infectious disease, to manage the international monetary system, to control international terrorism and to reach scores of other common goals. If the system for controlling infectious diseases - such as polio, SARS or avian flu - breaks down, humanity will be in trouble. Once states fail, no one assumes responsibility for their debt to outside lenders. If enough states disintegrate, their fall will threaten the stability of global civilization itself. 
1494. Elbridge Coly, (New America Security fellow), LAWFARE, Feb. 15, 2015 
retrieved May 3, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/2015/02/the-foreign-policy-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/2015/02/the-foreign-policy-]essay-a-nuclear-asia/. Third, the conventional balance is not fixed and the United States might actually lose the conventional advantage in the western Pacific -- or 

HANKYOREH, 	June 	9, 	2014 	retrieved 	April 	18, 	2015 	from 	important portions of it. A loss of U.S. conventional advantages in maritime Asia 

http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/english_edition/e_editorial/641452.html. The [HYPERLINK: http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/english_edition/e_editorial/641452.html] pessimists 
believe that China is biding its time. It won't make any definitive military moves until it's clear that a declining or disengaging United States won't come to the aid of Vietnam or the Philippines. The optimists believe that the Chinese government is fundamentally pragmatic. Beijing must know that any military intervention would put its entire program of economic growth and political stability at risk. It's impossible to guess who will ultimately be right in predicting China's trajectory. Much depends on the strength of regional security institutions and how embedded China decides to be 
in those institutions. And that in turn depends on the United States and its willingness 
to acknowledge the authority of such multilateral mechanisms. If the United States does not make room for multilateralism in the region, war becomes more likely. If the United States does not make room for China, then China may feel the need to make room for itself. 
1489. Nicholas Dynon, (Macquarie PhD candidate), THE DIPLOMAT, June 19, 
2013 retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://thediplomat.com/2013/06/soft-power-a-u-s-  [HYPERLINK: http://thediplomat.com/2013/06/soft-power-a-u-s-]china-battleground/. But it's actually inside China's borders where the soft power struggle between China and the U.S. is most prominent. Official pronouncements from Chinese leaders have long played up the notion that Western culture is an 
aggressive threat to China's own cultural sovereignty. It has thus taken myriad 
internal measures to ensure the country's post-Mao reforms remain an exercise in modernization without --westernization.‖ Since the 1990s, for example, ideological doctrine has been increasingly infused with a new cultural nationalism, and the Party's previously archaic propaganda system has been massively overhauled and working harder than ever. 
1490. Nicholas Dynon, (Macquarie PhD candidate), THE DIPLOMAT, June 19, 
2013 retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://thediplomat.com/2013/06/soft-power-a-u-s-  [HYPERLINK: http://thediplomat.com/2013/06/soft-power-a-u-s-]china-battleground/. So, how can Chinese soft power combat the advantage U.S. soft 
power currently enjoys? Classical military strategist Sun Tzu famously likened an 
effective army to water. Just as flowing water avoids the heights and hastens to the lowlands, so an army avoids strength and strikes weakness. So while winning over the hearts and minds of Main Street America may not be realistic, there are perhaps more achievable targets, from its cultivation of the developing world to enhancing its domestic soft power among its own populace. 
1491. James Hsiung, (NYU politics professor), CUNY, 2013, retrieved April 18, 
2105 from http://aacs.ccny.cuny.edu/2013conference/Papers/Hsiung James [HYPERLINK: http://aacs.ccny.cuny.edu/2013conference/Papers/Hsiung] Chieh 2.pdf. Most U.S. observers, including the media, usually gloat over the strategic 
rivalry between the two countries in the developing world. But, Mitchell maintains 
that U.S. and Chinese interests --overlap substantially.‖ Both countries share a realization that poverty and poor governance breed instability, crime, and terrorism in the developing countries. Both have an interest in --empowering developing nations to meet their domestic challenges and in forestalling the emergence of failed or failing states,‖ which could be the breeding grounds for terrorism, infectious diseases, and international crime. In full agreement with Mitchell's assessment, I would add two comments of my own. One, I know for a fact that China, as Mitchell suggests, does show a keen awareness of the danger posed by failed states to international peace and 
security, and, moreover, to human rights. A case in point is in regard to Somalia, 
where for two decades there has been no central government. Under conditions of this domestic anarchy, warlords have taken over; and the ceaseless in-fights have created chaos, misery, and massacres of helpless civilians. In U.N. discussions of the right of the world community to intervene in failed states like Somalia, China is known generally in support of the right of humanitarian intervention, known as the R2P (for --right to protect‖), but at the same time it has urged that the state's capability of protecting the people (and human rights) be strengthened, by installing, in the Somalia case, an effective central government. Conceivably, China could have done more to help the developing nations, especially in failing states, if its attention were 
not distracted by what it perceives as a soft-power denial problem that it must 
contend with. 
could come about because of a U.S. lack of resolve or inattention, because of the scale and effectiveness of China's substantial and ongoing military buildup, or because of some malign combination of both. In this case, Washington might seek to rely more on its nuclear weapons to compensate for this conventional weakness in 
extending deterrence to its allies in the region. In particular, Washington would likely 
seek to exploit its superior ability to conduct a limited nuclear war to deter China from taking advantage of its conventional lead. 
1495. Elbridge Coly, (New America Security fellow), LAWFARE, Feb. 15, 2015 
retrieved May 3, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/2015/02/the-foreign-policy-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/2015/02/the-foreign-policy-]essay-a-nuclear-asia/. A war in the region between the United States and China under such circumstances would be more susceptible to nuclear escalation. In any contingency in the region, the growing sophistication of China's large military would mean that the United States would have a much more difficult time overcoming it, 
since Chinese systems that have longer range, are more accurate, are smarter, and are 
more effectively netted together require more work, creativity, and skill to defeat. Put more directly, the United States and its allies would have to fight harder, quicker, nastier, deeper, for longer, with less deliberation, and over a wider battlefield than was the case in the past in order to defeat Chinese forces in maritime Asia. 
1496. Tyler McKnight, (San Diego IR MA), SAN DIEGO UNIVERSITY, Fall 2013, 
retrieved May 3, 2015 from http://www.sandiego.edu/cas/documents/polisci/Tyler  [HYPERLINK: http://www.sandiego.edu/cas/documents/polisci/Tyler]McKnightPaper.pdf. If the CCP were to strongly embrace and stoke nationalism, it would be hard to contain it. If the CCP were to define itself as the guardians of 
Chinese nationalism it would have to work hard to ensure it appeases the concerns of 
nationalist. China continues to have a number of festering territory disputes with its neighbors: the continued de facto independence of Taiwan, its border with India, and the Senkaku/Diaoyu islands in the East China Sea to name a few. With its history of foreign exploitation, China is acutely sensitive to any territory dispute. The CCP would have a very hard time maintaining its nationalist credentials if it were to allow other countries to assert control over any of the disputed areas. The Chinese leaders ran into this problem in the late 1990s when there was a distinct rise in nationalism in China. The authors of the popular nationalist book The China That Can Say No were openly critical of the Chinese government for taking a stance they viewed as too soft 
towards the United States and Japan. They endorsed taking action to annex Taiwan at 
any cost and open confrontation with Japan and the United States. A move such as this would at best be risky considering China was, and still is, dependent on Japan 
and the United States to ensure its continued economic growth.xxiv 
1497. Tyler McKnight, (San Diego IR MA), SAN DIEGO UNIVERSITY, Fall 2013, 
retrieved May 3, 2015 from http://www.sandiego.edu/cas/documents/polisci/Tyler  [HYPERLINK: http://www.sandiego.edu/cas/documents/polisci/Tyler]McKnightPaper.pdf. As a result of China's history of humiliation and the CCP's need to strengthen its nationalist credentials, China is more likely than other countries to use strong-arm tactics or force to assert itself. Such moves are a double-edged sword 
for the CCP. They could help the CCP to maintain its credentials as the guardians of 
the Chinese people, but this would be at the expense of hurting its standing in the international community, or worse, sending China on path towards armed conflict. When military units of opposing countries are in close proximity to each other and tensions run high, it can be very difficult to prevent acts of aggression from spilling over into armed conflict. Posturing on one side can be viewed as an imminent intent to attack on the other. China will have to balance a fine line to ensure their actions are not viewed as too soft at home or overly aggressive by the international community. If the CCP relies heavily on nationalism to strengthen its legitimacy and it is viewed 
too soft at home, it will hurt the staying power of the regime. If China is viewed as 
too aggressive by its neighbors, it could face reduced foreign investment, sanctions, or worse, armed conflict. All of which would also hurt the economic growth of China and as a result damage the legitimacy of the regime. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	11 7 
 
 
 
1497. Adam Liff, (Indiana East Asian IR professor), FOREIGN AFFAIRS, March 23, 2015 retrieved May 3, 2015 from https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/east- asia/2015-03-23/crowding-waters?cid=rss-rss_xml-crowding_the_waters-000000. 
Since September 2012, the de facto dispute between Beijing and Tokyo over islands in the East China Sea has become unprecedentedly unstable. China is conducting more military and paramilitary operations in the surrounding waters and airspace than ever, and Japan is scrambling more fighter jets than at any time since record-keeping began in 1958. By 2014, Chinese Major General Zhu Chenghu said, --the slightest carelessness could spark an unintended conflict‖ between the world's second- and third-largest economies. A military conflict between China and Japan would have 
catastrophic consequences and would almost certainly involve the U.S. military. 
1498. Adam Liff, (Indiana East Asian IR professor), FOREIGN AFFAIRS, March 
23, 2015 retrieved May 3, 2015 from https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/east- asia/2015-03-23/crowding-waters?cid=rss-rss_xml-crowding_the_waters-000000. 
After a chilly, abbreviated November 2014 summit between Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and Chinese President Xi Jinping -- the first ever meeting between the two leaders -- political relations have begun to thaw. But top-level political dialogue, 
although no longer frozen, remains on thin ice. More important, in the East China Sea 
things didn't get much better. Chinese government ships continue to enter Japan's de facto territorial waters. For its part, Tokyo shows no signs of backing down, scrambling fighters daily to intercept approaching Chinese planes. Meanwhile, public opinion polls record Sino-Japanese acrimony at unprecedented highs. While neither side wants a conflict, in this volatile reality of increasingly crowded waters and airspace, the risk that a miscalculation or accident could escalate into a major crisis is far too high for comfort. Indeed, the reality is sobering: institutional deficiencies undermine each government's ability to rapidly and effectively coordinate internally 
in the event of a crisis. Worse yet, despite seven years of negotiations, Tokyo and 
Beijing have failed to formally agree to -- much less implement reliably -- any bilateral crisis management mechanism. In short, the ability of China or Japan to prevent a low-level incident from escalating to a full-blown crisis is questionable. To ameliorate the risk of an avoidable catastrophe in the East China Sea, then, true 
statesmanship must be matched with expeditious institutional reforms on both sides. 
1500. Michael Auslin (AEI resident scholar), AMERICAN ENTERPRISE 
INSTITUTE, Dec. 30, 2014 retrieved May 3, 2015 from http://www.aei.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.aei.org/]publication/east-asias-struggle-past/. The coming year marks the 70th anniversary of 
the end of World War II. In most of the world, that will be an opportunity to look 
back at a conflict that is fading from memory. But in Asia, war history is very much alive. That could make 2015 a year of trouble. Consider that the anniversary comes at a time when relations among the region's largest powers -- China, Japan and South Korea -- are at their lowest ebb in years. Without some rare statesmanship in Asia, the potential exists for public disturbances and unintended conflict. If such unfortunate events do take place, they will be the fruit of years of bad feelings, distrust and hatred sown on all sides. Given the unresolved territorial disputes among these three, nationalist passion is a recipe for potential disaster. The Japanese, in particular, have reason to be worried, since they are at odds with both China and South Korea. 
1501. Michael Auslin (AEI resident scholar), AMERICAN ENTERPRISE 
INSTITUTE, Dec. 30, 2014 retrieved May 3, 2015 from http://www.aei.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.aei.org/]publication/east-asias-struggle-past/. Seventy years on, East Asia is a region trapped by history and descending into what appears to be permanent hatred, a conclusion supported by public-opinion polls in China and South Korea that rank democratic Japan as their country's greatest threat. Bad relations would be worrisome enough, but such nationalist fervor may spill over into the region's seas. In the East China Sea, China is actively challenging Japan's control over the Senkaku Islands. In the Sea of Japan, Tokyo and Seoul continue to disagree over ownership of the Pinnacle 
Islands. Even a minor accident, such as a collision of ships from both sides, could 
easily spiral out of control. 
1502. Roslyn Layton, (Aalborg Center for Communication, Media and Information 
Studies PhD fellow), MERCATUS CENTER, Aug. 12, 2014 retrieved Apr. 22, 2015 from http://mercatus.org/publication/innovation-investment-and-competition-broad  [HYPERLINK: http://mercatus.org/publication/innovation-investment-and-competition-broad]band-and-impact-america-s-digital-economy. How true are fears that the United States is falling behind the rest of the world when it comes to broadband? Are Americans paying more for lower-quality broadband than Europeans and South Koreans, and are US companies falling behind their global counterparts? In a new 
study for the Mercatus Center at George Mason University, Roslyn Layton and 
Michael Horney survey broadband in America and compare broadband costs around the world. They find that the United States is a global leader in broadband, as measured by the level of broadband-enabled economic activity, the number of Internet-based companies, the level of digital exports, and the level of Internet- enabled employment. 
1503. Roslyn Layton, (Aalborg Center for Communication, Media and Information 
Studies PhD fellow), MERCATUS CENTER, Aug. 12, 2014 retrieved Apr. 22, 2015 
from http://mercatus.org/publication/innovation-investment-and-competition-broad  [HYPERLINK: http://mercatus.org/publication/innovation-investment-and-competition-broad]
band-and-impact-america-s-digital-economy. In contrast, the United States' pricing 
structure allows Americans to access entry-level broadband for prices below the global average. Moreover, Americans are paying for innovative networks that simply are not available in much of Europe. For example, in 2013 just 26 percent of people in the EU had access to 4G/LTE (long-term evolution) wireless networks, but 97 percent of Americans had the ability to access these networks. INNOVATION America's broadband market is characterized by a high level of innovation in networks, services, and technologies. Network innovations continue to improve the capacity and throughput of broadband networks. The United States' growing digital economy is the result of the vast majority of Americans having broadband access and 
using it to produce and consume a range of goods and services. A fixation on 
broadband speeds would harm policies that promote greater adoption and investment, as well as more competition. 


1504. Roslyn Layton, (Aalborg Center for Communication, Media and Information Studies PhD fellow), MERCATUS CENTER, Aug. 12, 2014 retrieved Apr. 22, 2015 from http://mercatus.org/publication/innovation-investment-and-competition-broad  [HYPERLINK: http://mercatus.org/publication/innovation-investment-and-competition-broad]band-and-impact-america-s-digital-economy. Some critics of US broadband policies argue that America's speeds lag behind those of other countries, thereby harming innovation. However, if speeds were all that mattered, then the Internet should be 
dominated by firms from South Korea, Japan, and Hong Kong. Instead, Internet 
giants like Google, Amazon, and Facebook come from the United States. Innovation is highly complex and results from the interplay of many factors in a larger inno- vation ecosystem. America's broadband networks are an important input, but not the only one, in the innovation landscape. For example, though the United States and Canada have only 5 percent of the world's population, these two countries account for more than half of the world's 4G/LTE subscriptions, making North America a hotbed for mobile innovation. 
1505. Executive office of the President, June 2014, retrieved April 22, 2015 from 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/manufacturing_and_innovation_r  [HYPERLINK: http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/manufacturing_and_innovation_r]
eport.pdf. Manufacturing represents 12 percent of U.S. GDP, but it contributes 60% of all U.S. research and development employees, 75% of U.S. private sector research and development, and the vast majority of all patents issued in the United States. U.S. manufacturing firms are more innovative, on average, innovating at more than twice the rate of other U.S. businesses - with over 30% reporting an innovation between 2008 and 2010 alone compared to only 13% for other U.S. businesses. For many technologies, the capabilities gained in production are intertwined with new learning and the knowledge activities of research, development and design. The iterative innovation cycle between engineering and production on the shop floor is responsible for a range of breakthrough technologies, explaining why firms are increasingly reconnecting production with development and design. 
1506. Executive office of the President, June 2014, retrieved April 22, 2015 from 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/manufacturing_and_innovation_r  [HYPERLINK: http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/manufacturing_and_innovation_r]
eport.pdf. Digital design and devices: The nation's historic strengths in software and digital design - the U.S. produces 80% of the world's software, leads in --big data‖ analytics and sensors, and contains the majority of the world's supercomputing - are positioning it to lead in an era of connected devices and of products that are digitally designed, tested, and assembled before taking final form on the shop floor. The results of these emerging technologies and renewed focus on manufacturing innovation are already spurring change in U.S. manufacturing. Existing manufacturers have accelerated investment in research and development while the rate of growth for entrepreneurs opening new businesses in manufacturing is at its fastest pace in over 20 years. 
1507. Julius Genachowski, (FCC chairman), FORBES, Jan. 18, 2013 retrieved April 
22, 2015 from http://www.forbes.com/sites/ciocentral/2013/01/18/faster-sooner-why-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/ciocentral/2013/01/18/faster-sooner-why-]
the-u-s-needs-gigabit-communities/. The good news is that there's lots of good news. After falling behind Asia and Europe, we've regained global leadership in mobile. The U.S. is the first country to deploy 4G wireless networks at scale and is home to most of the world's LTE subscribers, making the United States the global test bed for LTE apps and services. The mobile --apps economy,‖ which has already created hundreds of thousands of jobs, is a made-in-the-USA phenomenon. On the wired side, broadband networks capable of 100 megabits per second speeds passed less that 20% of U.S. homes in 2009. That number is now more than 80%, which is near the 
world lead. By contrast, in Europe, networks capable of 30 megabits per second reach 
only 50% of households. But progress isn't victory, particularly in this fast-moving sector. 
1508. Laura DeNardis, (American University communication professor), THE 
GLOBAL WAR FOR INTERNET GOVERNANCE, 2014, 11. The Privatization of Internet Governance Internet governance is about governance, not governments. Governance is traditionally understood as the efforts of sovereign nation states to regulate activities within or through national boundaries. Governments oversee many Internet governance functions, whether enforcing child protection measures, enacting privacy laws, enforcing computer fraud and abuse statutes, regulating antitrust, or generally developing national or regional statutes related to information policy. From the standpoint of global Internet governance, some sovereign governments also unfortunately censor information or enact surveillance over citizens. Most Internet governance functions have historically not been the domain of governments but have been executed via private ordering, technical design, and new institutional forms, all enacted in historically specific contexts of technological and social change. 
1509. Laura DeNardis, (American University communication professor), THE 
GLOBAL WAR FOR INTERNET GOVERNANCE, 2014, 12. Much of Internet governance is enacted by private corporations and nongovernmental entities. For example, the particulars of individual privacy online are set via social media end user agreements and the data collection and retention practices of the online advertising industry, search engines, and other information intermediaries. As evident in the Internet protest example introduced earlier, the collective action of private citizens, as well as high-profile boycotts by private companies, can also exert influence on Internet governance decisions. In this sense, private industry not only exerts influence via the policies corporations set for usage of their products and services; it also influences traditional governmental actions. Private companies like VeriSign serve as the domain name registries running vital Internet governance decisions. Private telecommunications companies make up the majority of the Internet's backbone and conjoin via private contractual agreements at exchange points. 
1510. Laura DeNardis, (American University communication professor), THE 
GLOBAL WAR FOR INTERNET GOVERNANCE, 2014, 14. Another broader context is the global influence of multinational corporations on regulatory decisions across industries including pharmaceuticals, telecommunications, entertainment, and energy. In the SOPA/PIPA context, media content industries invested heavily in advancing legislation and the Internet industry spent considerable lobbying money opposing the legislation. Influence also involves knowledge leers in that regulatory areas requiring a great deal of esoteric knowledge rely on the input of industry professionals as well as outside experts, often funded by industry. Another lever was the influence Internet companies had in mobilizing their user bases into political action and capturing the attention of politicians with unprecedented Internet blackouts. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	11 8 
 
 
 
1511. Laura DeNardis, (American University communication professor), THE GLOBAL WAR FOR INTERNET GOVERNANCE, 2014, 14. Transnational corporations operating in a variety of industries set de facto global public policy via their approaches to labor practices, environmental impacts, health care for employees, fair trade, and human rights. Multinational corporations, via this cross-cultural decision making, enact global governance. In this broader milieu, the relevant question involves the basis on which nongovernmental entities derive the legitimacy to make technical governance decisions with public policy impacts. In the online context, freedom of expression is mediated by private actors as much as by national laws or international treaties. Various countries' constitutional and statutory protections do not necessarily apply to private actors. 
1512. Brittany Hillen, (Slasher Gear writer), SLASHERGEAR, Dec. 5, 2012 
retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.slashgear.com/house-unanimously-passes-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.slashgear.com/house-unanimously-passes-]ban-on-un-internet-regulation-05259716/. The House of Representatives, just as the Senate did, has unanimously passed a resolution to ban UN regulation of the Internet. In doing so, it has demonstrated the resolve of the United States in its stance on promoting a --global Internet free from government control.‖ The bill that was passed 
opposes changes to the telecommunications treaty that would alter how the Internet is 
run. Oregon Senator Greg Walden stated: --The 193 member countries of the United Nations are gathered to consider whether to apply to the Internet a regulatory regime that the International Telecommunications Union created in the 1980s for old- fashioned telephone service . . . [It] must be strongly opposed by our delegation.‖ The bill was put forth by Senator Claire McCaskill (D) and Senator Marco Rubio (R). The United States isn't the only nation that opposes the UN regulation, however, with all 27 European Union states taking the same stance on the matter as the US. Some other countries, including locations in the Middle East, Africa, Asia, as well as Russia, are 
in favor of some changes, however. [ellipsis in original] 
1513. Jeffrey Eisenach, (AEI visiting scholar), AMERICAN ENTERPRISE 
INSTITUTE, Sept. 25, 2012 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.aei.org/pub  [HYPERLINK: http://www.aei.org/pub]lication/the-internet-doesnt-need-more-regulation/. Value creation in the Internet ecosystem depends on firms working together to generate the products and services consumers want. Broadband networks are only valuable when combined with content, devices, applications, and other broadband networks. The more compelling these combinations of products are, and the more seamlessly they work together, the more people will sign up for broadband connections. Arguably the biggest 
development in the mobile broadband world this year is the release of the iPhone 5, 
which will dramatically increase the demand for the mobile carriers' new LTE networks. If you have heard the terms U-verse, Xfinity, and FiOS, it's because AT&T, Comcast, and Verizon are all among the ten largest U.S. advertisers. 
1514. Jeffrey Eisenach, (AEI visiting scholar), AMERICAN ENTERPRISE 
INSTITUTE, Sept. 25, 2012 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.aei.org/pub  [HYPERLINK: http://www.aei.org/pub]lication/the-internet-doesnt-need-more-regulation/. Handwringing aside, in the real world ISPs aren't likely to discriminate, even against their competitors. Consider, for example, the success of Amazon, Hulu, iTunes, Netflix, and other over-the-top video distributors (OVDs). Despite the fact that these firms compete directly with ISPs (like 
Comcast and Verizon) for video revenues, their traffic continues to flow unimpeded 
over the Internet, and OVDs are growing by leaps and bounds. In November 2011 alone, 167 million unique online video viewers streamed 21.9 billion videos. 
1515. Jeffrey Eisenach, (AEI visiting scholar), AMERICAN ENTERPRISE 
INSTITUTE, Sept. 25, 2012 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.aei.org/pub  [HYPERLINK: http://www.aei.org/pub]lication/the-internet-doesnt-need-more-regulation/. Open access is not the exception, it's the rule: Broadband ISPs carry traffic that --competes‖ with their own products every day, from ring tones and music to map applications and online games. They do it for the same reason that Microsoft makes a version of Word that runs on Apple computers, and that text messages originating on iPhones can be read on devices that run on Android and Windows: Consumers expect it. In its reply brief in the net neutrality case, the FCC claims the authority to engage in --prophylactic‖ regulation --  as well it might, since it certainly hasn't demonstrated the sort of market failure that would justify government intervention. To the contrary, the Internet marketplace has been working just fine without the FCC's new rules, and it will continue to do so if the court wisely decides to strike them down. 
1516. Cynthia Beltz, (AEI research fellow), ISSUES IN SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, Nov. 27, 2013 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://issues.org/13-  [HYPERLINK: http://issues.org/13-]3/beltz/. In addition, private-sector institutions need to play a more active role in building an international consensus in favor of open global information networks. Given the complexity of the issues, the limitations of the WTO process, and the difficulties involved in improving it, much of the work for resolving conflicts over market access, standards, and pro-investment regulations is shifting to private organizations. This shift was reflected in the recent WTO negotiations and was credited in part for enabling the conclusion of an agreement. In addition to U.S. trade associations, new transnational organizations are emerging, such as the Global Information Infrastructure Commission, which is made up of chief executive officers from around the world. 
1517. Gianluigi Negro, (Università della Svizzera italiana in Lugano PhD candidate), 
NATIONAL REVIEW, June 19, 2014 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.nationalreview.com/article/380693/leave-internet-alone-gianluigi-negro.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationalreview.com/article/380693/leave-internet-alone-gianluigi-negro]Take China, which since 2008 has been the country with the largest number of Internet users. While the Chinese Internet has grown quickly, it could have grown much more quickly if it had not been hampered by heavy regulation. In addition to 
strict controls on Internet content, the Chinese maintain strict regulation of 
communications companies and prohibit companies from engaging in business 


1518. Gianluigi Negro, (Università della Svizzera italiana in Lugano PhD candidate), NATIONAL REVIEW, June 19, 2014 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.nationalreview.com/article/380693/leave-internet-alone-gianluigi-negro.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationalreview.com/article/380693/leave-internet-alone-gianluigi-negro]Similarly, the European framework of regulations that treat broadband as a public utility also presents dangers to avoid. The European system is built on service-based competition, whereby a new entrant into the service market leases access from 
established providers at wholesale costs  --  known as unbundling. As a result, there is 
little incentive for market entrants to invest in their own new networks or move beyond the limit of the infrastructure that has already been created; the Internet infrastructure has therefore remained stagnant. 
1519. Gianluigi Negro, (Università della Svizzera italiana in Lugano PhD candidate), 
NATIONAL REVIEW, June 19, 2014 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.nationalreview.com/article/380693/leave-internet-alone-gianluigi-negro.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationalreview.com/article/380693/leave-internet-alone-gianluigi-negro]A recent analysis by Professor Christopher Yoo at the University of Pennsylvania clearly demonstrates that Europe's imposing of stifling telephone-era regulations on 
broadband networks hinders deployment and raises prices. Specifically, the study 
found that the European model does little to encourage investment in new communications networks. Broadband investment per household in the U.S. was over twice that of Europe  --  $562 per household compared to $244 per household in 2012. Furthermore, the study found that the U.S. led Europe in the deployment of important high-speed services, such as LTE wireless networks and fiber. LTE coverage was 86 percent in the U.S. compared to 27 percent in Europe, while fiber coverage in the 
U.S. was nearly double that of Europe. And perhaps more important for consumers, 
basic broadband was less expensive in the U.S. than in Europe. 
1520. Gianluigi Negro, (Università della Svizzera italiana in Lugano PhD candidate), 
NATIONAL REVIEW, June 19, 2014 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.nationalreview.com/article/380693/leave-internet-alone-gianluigi-negro.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationalreview.com/article/380693/leave-internet-alone-gianluigi-negro]These latest data, which join an enormous body of resounding evidence, show that the careful regulatory approach of the U.S. has been very effective at spurring convergence and competition among disparate communication, content, and service providers, with tremendous benefits delivered to consumers. What's more, robust competition has fueled continuous investment in new networks and technologies. As 
American officials consider updates to the Telecommunications Act of 1996 or 
changes to the breadth of regulations applied to broadband networks, they should not minimize the importance of restricting government interference in the Internet. The approach of light regulation on the Internet that policymakers have taken to date has served the U.S. well, allowing more than 98 percent of the country to have access to high-speed wired and wireless service. Congress and the FCC should guard against giving federal agencies any power to over-regulate the Internet. 
1521. Laura DeNardis, (American University communication professor), THE 
GLOBAL WAR FOR INTERNET GOVERNANCE, 2014, 229. Another concern about formal mechanisms of multistakeholderism is the risk of inherent centralization. Multistakeholder approaches, to be effective, tend to become centralized governance processes requiring organization, procedural mechanisms, and even hierarchy to ensure that all stakeholder voices are heard. Who should serve as this gatekeeper and enforcer? The Internet's success has traditionally emanated from bottom-up involvement whereby no one entity is in control of Internet governance in its entirety. The presumption behind the enforcement of multistakeholderism is government centralization because government has the necessary legitimacy to create the processes to foster and enforce multistakeholder approaches. This question of legitimacy creates an infinite regress of having to have an enforcer of multistakeholderism. When multistakeholderism elevates the role of private industry in enforcing Internet policymaking, this also raises legitimacy questions. 
1522. Laura DeNardis, (American University communication professor), THE 
GLOBAL WAR FOR INTERNET GOVERNANCE, 2014, 230. A similar concern about multistakeholder governance is raised with the following question: Whose democratic values? Multistakeholder approaches that seek to promote democracy can be a race to the lowest common denominator of what is an acceptable democratic value. For example, China is centrally involved in multistakeholder discussions in U.N. groups and fora. China's conception of democratic values on the Internet is not a conception of democracy that would promote Internet freedom at all, but one concerned with restricting the flow of information through filtering and blocking technologies. A final caveat is that multistakeholderism is inherently focused on traditional governments. Multistakeholderism, as explained above, can be a proxy for efforts to diminish the power, real or perceived, of the United States government over central Internet governance functions such as the distribution of Internet names and numbers. Underlying these efforts is the desire to have power sharing by many governments, rather than one. The risk is that the role of civil society, the input of corporations, and the contributions of new global institutional forms are omitted. 
1523. Laura DeNardis, (American University communication professor), THE 
GLOBAL WAR FOR INTERNET GOVERNANCE, 2014, 230. Multistakeholder models of Internet governance in the most distributed and general sense of decentralization and diversity can avoid the pitfalls of these formalized mechanisms of multistakeholderism that, ironically, tip the scale toward governmental control and centralization. This book has explained the many points of governance control over the Internet It is exactly this decentralized and distributed balance of power that is likely responsible for the ongoing resilience, stability, and adaptability of the Internet. The difference is between a top-down imposition of Multistakeholderism and the way actual multistakeholder approaches organically grow in practice. 
1524. Jim Adler, (Chief Privacy Officer & GM of Data Systems), TRUSTE BLOG, 
July 27, 2012 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.truste.com/blog/2012/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.truste.com/blog/2012/]

practices that would take advantage of the convergence of media, IT, and 	07/27/when-self-regulation-works-your-privacy-is-in-good-hands/. 	Despite 	the 

communications that benefits consumers in the rest of the world. For example, telecommunications enterprises are prohibited from engaging in radio and broadcasting operations (including wireline and wireless), while broadcasting companies are prohibited from engaging in telecommunications activities. China is an extreme example, but it is not difficult to imagine that the United States could go in a similar direction if U.S. officials open the door to interventionist Internet regulation. 
By asking the government to reclassify Internet service providers as telephone 
companies, under the guise of allegedly ensuring a free and open Internet, some Americans may unwittingly be on the road to ceding power to forces that can use the Internet against them, as is seen in China every day. 
ongoing discussions about online privacy by legislatures, regulators, and data conservationists  --  self-regulation remains the primary tool to ensure consumer information is handled responsibly. And rightly so. Too often, privacy debates devolve into false dichotomies, dominated by arguments that advocate for being always anonymous or that privacy is dead. Both are wrong. Online privacy continues to be an important conversation because we humans are both social and autonomous creatures. And, we need solutions that balance values of both disclosure and discretion. The U.S. founders knew that. Through products and services, the 
technology industry is well positioned to address the weighty nuances of deciphering 
public from private places, understanding who uses what products, and how those products might be abused. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	11 9 
 
 
 
1525. Jim Adler, (Chief Privacy Officer & GM of Data Systems), TRUSTE BLOG, July 27, 2012 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.truste.com/blog/2012/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.truste.com/blog/2012/]07/27/when-self-regulation-works-your-privacy-is-in-good-hands/. But although industry might be best positioned to address privacy issues, they have no monopoly on them. Privacy is a team sport. As I discussed in my talk at the recent Privacy Identity Innovation conference, technologists drive innovation. But responsible innovation is only achieved when tempered with the counsel (and sometimes warnings) of humanitarians  --  philosophers, journalists, economists, anthropologists, and historians. And, where appropriate, this counsel must be heeded and enforced, either voluntarily through self-regulation or involuntarily by law. Self-regulation is simply the most efficient way to protect consumers and encourage innovation. Let me break it down: Self-regulation adapts better than government regulation The process of creating, passing, implementing, sustaining and auditing government regulation is, as you can imagine, quite long. Congress has attempted comprehensive privacy legislation for years. While the FTC has been effective at prosecuting offenders recently, it just can't give consumers the protections they need and the innovation they want. Self-regulation is fast. Privacy companies, like TRUSTe, can verify the claims of their clients and operate at the speed of technology. 
1526. Jim Adler, (Chief Privacy Officer & GM of Data Systems), TRUSTE BLOG, 
July 27, 2012 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.truste.com/blog/2012/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.truste.com/blog/2012/]


1532. Taylor Crowe, (Motley Fool energy writer), MOTLEY FOOL, Feb. 15, 2014 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2014/02/15/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2014/02/15/]this-technology-is-our-only-real-shot-at-addressin.aspx. The way that the internet of things could revolutionize our lives can be hard to conceptualize all at once. So today let's focus on one place where machine to machine communication could have an immense impact: Energy consumption. Not only could this technology make turning 
the lights on easier, but it could be the key to us effectively managing anthropogenic 
carbon emissions. Regardless of your thoughts and opinions on climate change and the scope of how much carbon emissions affects the global atmosphere, we all can agree on one thing: Emitting less carbon is a good thing, especially if it can be done without impeding economic growth. For years, the battleground for the climate change debate has been on the energy generation side, pitting alternative energy options like wind and solar against fossil fuels. The problem with fixating on this side of the argument, though, is that even under the most ambitious outlooks for alternative energy growth, we will never be able to get carbon emissions below the 
threshold many think is required to prevent significant temperature changes over the 
next century. 
1533. Taylor Crowe, (Motley Fool energy writer), MOTLEY FOOL, Feb. 15, 2014 
retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2014/02/15/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2014/02/15/]this-technology-is-our-only-real-shot-at-addressin.aspx. Now, imagine a world where 

07/27/when-self-regulation-works-your-privacy-is-in-good-hands/. 	Self-regulation 	every automobile was able to communicate with the others, giving instant feedback 

offers solutions to actual problems By allowing industry to self-regulate, innovation is prioritized alongside consumer protection  --  not innovation at the expense of consumer protection. We tend to forget how new the Internet is and, to some extent, 
that we are all making this up as we go. Self-regulation encourages a race to the top 
Industry players vie for users. Winning companies offer the best products and are most responsive to all stakeholders including customers, advocates, and regulators. Take, for example, Intelius' work with the National Network to End Domestic Violence (NNEDV). Working with NNEDV, we developed a suppression feature in TrueRep which offers users the opportunity to block their most recent contact information (my take here). Self-regulation fits with Privacy-by-Design (PbD) By accommodating for privacy early in the design process, users can have just-in-time controls over their data. PbD was one of the driving forces for our TrueRep product 
where users have access and control of their own public profile. 
1527. Jim Adler, (Chief Privacy Officer & GM of Data Systems), TRUSTE BLOG, 
July 27, 2012 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.truste.com/blog/2012/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.truste.com/blog/2012/]
on traffic conditions and providing alternative routes to avoid traffic jams. This is the fundamental concept of machine-to-machine communications, and it goes way beyond the scope of just automobiles and household conveniences. One of the added benefits of this technology is the impact it could have on our everyday energy consumption and the ultimate reduction in total carbon emissions. A recent report by the Carbon War Room estimates that the incorporation of machine-to-machine communication in the energy, transportation, built environment (its fancy term for buildings), and agriculture sectors could reduce global greenhouse gas emissions by 9.1 gigatons of CO2 equivalent annually. That's 18.2 trillion pounds, or equivalent to eliminating all of the United States' and India's total greenhouse gas emissions combined, and more than triple the reductions we can expect with an extremely ambitious alternative energy conversion program. 
1534. Taylor Crowe, (Motley Fool energy writer), MOTLEY FOOL, Feb. 15, 2014 
retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2014/02/15/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2014/02/15/]this-technology-is-our-only-real-shot-at-addressin.aspx. How is this possible? 

07/27/when-self-regulation-works-your-privacy-is-in-good-hands/. 	Self-regulation 	Increased communication between everything - engines, appliances, generators, 

addresses data abuses The fiercest enemy of consumer privacy is data abuse. Sure, data abuse can't be accomplished without access to the data. But where data is already public, it shouldn't be used for harm. That's the wisdom of the Fair Credit Reporting Act. No matter how the data is accessed, businesses must tread carefully when it's used for sensitive purposes like hiring or housing. We humans are complex. 
As we map our complex society online, getting privacy right will take some time. 
Self-regulation is a key ingredient to responsible, fast-paced innovation. Give it a chance. 
1528. John Negroponte, (Yale's Jackson Institute for Global Affairs research fellow), 
CFR, June 10, 2013 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.cfr.org/cybersecurity/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.cfr.org/cybersecurity/]defending-open-global-secure-resilient-internet/p30836. Moreover, regulations that constrict the flow of information not only create disparities among people's access to knowledge but also have a negative effect on the shape, architecture, safety, and resilience of the Internet. In 2012, for example, two proposals in the U.S. Congress to allow for filtering of the DNS, which would enable the government to require U.S. 
companies to block access to certain websites, posed a significant risk to a wider 
cybersecurity strategy. 
1529. John Negroponte, (Yale's Jackson Institute for Global Affairs research fellow), 
CFR, June 10, 2013 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.cfr.org/cybersecurity/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.cfr.org/cybersecurity/]
automobiles - allows for instant feedback for more efficient travel routes, optimized 
fertilizer and water consumption to reduce deforestation, real-time monitoring of electricity consumption and instant feedback to generators, and fully integrated heating, cooling, and lighting systems that can adjust for human occupancy. There are lots of projections and estimates related to carbon emissions and climate change, but the one that has emerged as the standard bearer is the amount of carbon emissions it would take to increase global temperatures by 2 degrees Centigrade. According to the UN's Environment Programme, annual anthropological greenhouse gas emissions would need to decrease by 15% from recent levels to keep us under the carbon 
atmospheric levels. Based on current emissions and the 9.1 gigaton estimate from 
Carbon War Room's report, it would be enough to reduce global emissions by 18.6%, well within the range of the UN's projections. 
1535. Maximillian Curtis, (US State Department), FUTURE FOREIGN POLICY, 
May 16, 2014 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.futureforeignpolicy.com/the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.futureforeignpolicy.com/the-]global-implications-of-us-internet-regulation/. The Web has changed the global economic landscape. Ordinary people with extraordinary ideas can create massive media empires from their laptops, and even major successes are faced with competition from other people, start-ups, and corporations with great, innovative 
ideas. The ability to make and spread these ideas is the foundation of any free and 
open market. The Internet has a vast and immediate marketplace of users, relatively 

defending-open-global-secure-resilient-internet/p30836. 	Administrative 	and 	low-cost barriers to entry, and a competitive environment that prioritizes better 

technological changes over the next few years threaten to destabilize the current 
bottom-up approach to governance that combines the private and nonprofit sectors. The expansion of the DNS, for example, is intended to enhance competition, innovation, and consumer choice, but critics fear that without adequate coordination 
and oversight it could instead create consumer confusion, undermine copyright and 
brand rights, and increase the opportunity for cyber crime. For example, while many of the new generic top-level domains (e.g., .app, .search, .cloud, .news, etc.) will be managed by government entities, municipalities, standards bodies, and nonprofits, others will be managed by private companies who may be tempted to act as profit- motivated gatekeepers furthering their own private interests, rather than as stewards of the public interest managing a public resource. 
1530. John Negroponte, (Yale's Jackson Institute for Global Affairs research fellow), 
CFR, June 10, 2013 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.cfr.org/cybersecurity/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.cfr.org/cybersecurity/]defending-open-global-secure-resilient-internet/p30836. Successfully meeting the challenges of the digital age requires a rethinking of domestic institutions and processes that were designed for the twentieth century. The rapid rate of technological change cannot help but outpace traditional legislative approaches and decision-making processes. The threats of the past were relatively slow developing and geographically rooted, so there was an appropriate distribution of authorities among defense, intelligence, law enforcement, and foreign policy agencies. Cyberattacks, however, can be launched from anywhere in the world, including from networks inside the United States, and their effects can be felt in minutes. Moreover, 
they do not always look like attacks. Many threats and actual compromises appear as 
little inconsistencies. Stolen data is not taken away, so the losses may never be noticed, but suddenly companies have new competitors or foreign actors have an uncanny insight into their enemies' activities. 
1531. John Negroponte, (Yale's Jackson Institute for Global Affairs research fellow), 
CFR, June 10, 2013 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.cfr.org/cybersecurity/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.cfr.org/cybersecurity/]defending-open-global-secure-resilient-internet/p30836. In the United States, a lack of a coherent vision, the absence of appropriate authority to implement policy, and legislative gridlock are significant obstacles to global leadership. The United States 
should act affirmatively to articulate norms of behavior, regulation, and partnership, 
or others will do so. In addition, the effects of domestic decisions spread far beyond national borders and will affect not only users, companies, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and policymakers in other countries but also the health, stability, resilience, and integrity of the global Internet. The bottom line is clear: digital foreign policy must begin with domestic policy. 
alternatives. This means that unlike in other forms of media, online monopolies naturally have a limited lifespan. Every service users enjoy today is under constant threat of someday being overtaken by a better, more viable competitor -- think of the migration of MySpace users to Facebook -- even if that competition comes from half a world away. 
1536. Maximillian Curtis, (US State Department), FUTURE FOREIGN POLICY, 
May 16, 2014 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.futureforeignpolicy.com/the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.futureforeignpolicy.com/the-]
global-implications-of-us-internet-regulation/. Under --fast lanes‖ provisions, however, the Internet of the future could see companies paying ISPs a premium to deliver faster speeds and impede their competitors. Since almost every industry today relies on the Internet, US innovation would suffer enormously from such regulatory action, which could promote monopolistic and anti-competitive practices. Eroding the principle of net neutrality is a dangerous step towards the United States relinquishing its leading role in the Information Age. Although foreign start-ups would have more room to becoming competitively pioneering, the world's technology markets would 
surely lose out if the US were less innovative. 
1537. Maximillian Curtis, (US State Department), FUTURE FOREIGN POLICY, 
May 16, 2014 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.futureforeignpolicy.com/the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.futureforeignpolicy.com/the-]global-implications-of-us-internet-regulation/. Nightmare situations like these are possible (and even then, they are far from likely) only in the far, far future. In the short- to medium-term, the worst that could likely happen is more intense negotiations over the EU-US free trade deal (TTIP). The worst-case scenarios simply illustrate the relationship between bureaucratic regulation, the Web, and the lives of everyone who uses it. The Internet is increasingly important for the global economy and international norms, just as US regulation is increasingly important for the 
Internet and how it is governed. In this sense, the net neutrality debate should be 
viewed from a foreign policy perspective. Keeping in mind the future of US innovation, worldwide economic growth, public diplomacy, and global freedom of speech, US lawmakers and regulators should consider the long-term global implications of Internet regulation. The way the United States treats online data is not simply a geeky, esoteric issue -- it has real-world consequences for both commerce and freedom of speech globally. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	12 0 
 
 
 
1538. Julius Genachowski, (FCC chairman), FORBES, Jan. 18, 2013 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.forbes.com/sites/ciocentral/2013/01/18/faster-sooner-why-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/ciocentral/2013/01/18/faster-sooner-why-]the-u-s-needs-gigabit-communities/. Making sure the U.S. has super-fast, high- capacity, ubiquitous broadband networks delivering speeds measured in gigabits, not megabits isn't just a matter of consumer convenience, as important as that is. It's essential to economic growth, job creation and U.S. competitiveness. In our 21st century economy, innovation leadership is necessary for economic leadership. Our broadband infrastructure is our central platform for innovation, and faster speeds - will spur innovation. In a global economy, talent and capital can flow anywhere, and they'll flow to countries with the strongest innovation infrastructure. We're in a global bandwidth race, and we need to ensure the U.S. has a strategic bandwidth advantage. Without it, we risk losing our global lead on innovation, and we risk watching jobs and investment flow elsewhere. 
1539. Julius Genachowski, (FCC chairman), FORBES, Jan. 18, 2013 retrieved April 
22, 2015 from http://www.forbes.com/sites/ciocentral/2013/01/18/faster-sooner-why-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/ciocentral/2013/01/18/faster-sooner-why-]the-u-s-needs-gigabit-communities/. We need more of these gigabit testbeds to ensure there is a sufficient market in the U.S. for super-high-bandwidth applications and services. A critical mass of gigabit communities will spur innovation and investment. Some broadband providers say the need for gigabit networks is overblown. They cite 
the lack of consumer demand for applications requiring gigabit speeds. One cable 
industry leader called the focus on top-end network speeds an --irrelevant exercise in bragging rights.‖ But this seriously misreads what the U.S. needs to grow our economy and maintain our leadership in today's global, innovation-driven economy. And it also overlooks the history of U.S. innovators to take advantage of increased network capacity. 
1540. Julius Genachowski, (FCC chairman), FORBES, Jan. 18, 2013 retrieved April 
22, 2015 from http://www.forbes.com/sites/ciocentral/2013/01/18/faster-sooner-why-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/ciocentral/2013/01/18/faster-sooner-why-]the-u-s-needs-gigabit-communities/. Gigabit networks can enable genetic sequencing 
to treat cancer patients, immersive and creative software to support lifelong learning 
from home, and ways for small businesses to take advantage of Big Data. Greater network speeds will certainly lead to unexpected new inventions. That's been consistently true since the Internet began. We need U.S. innovators to develop tomorrow's technologies here, and gigabit testbeds will help ensure that the U.S. remains a magnet for the world's greatest entrepreneurs. 
1541. Julius Genachowski, (FCC chairman), FORBES, Jan. 18, 2013 retrieved April 
22, 2015 from http://www.forbes.com/sites/ciocentral/2013/01/18/faster-sooner-why-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/ciocentral/2013/01/18/faster-sooner-why-]the-u-s-needs-gigabit-communities/. We proposed a national --Dig Once‖ initiative 
that encourages laying fiber conduit whenever roads are dug, which the President 
adopted in an Executive Order last year. We've also transformed the Commission's Universal Service Fund from a program designed to support phone networks into the Connect America Fund, the largest ever public investment in rural broadband - $45 billion over the next 10 years, including funding for high-speed broadband to anchor institutions like schools and hospitals. Building on these efforts, I challenge broadband providers and local leaders to bring at least one gigabit testbed community to all 50 states by 2015. The FCC will actively engage with broadband providers and community leaders to help achieve this goal, including by launching a clearinghouse for best practices on speeding gigabit deployment. America led the 20th century 
economy because we led the world in innovation. Leadership in innovation is even 
more important in today's global economy. Ensuring the U.S. has a strategic bandwidth advantage - ultra-fast, high-capacity, ubiquitous broadband - is critical to our global competitiveness. 
1542. Phil Wilson, (Deloitte Technology, Media and Telecommunications director), 
DELOITTE, September 2014, retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www2.deloitte.  [HYPERLINK: http://www2.deloitte/]com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/technology-media-telecommunications/us- tmt-mobile-index-09262014.pdf. If the U.S. lead in mobile broadband is eroded or lost, it could result in substantial damage to U.S. economic development and 
technology leadership Applying industry-specific multipliers to estimate the U.S. 
economic impact of reduced capital expenditure by carriers, a mobile broadband spectrum supply shortage could result in a direct loss of $67 billion in GDP and 344,000 jobs through 2022. However, the indirect and induced impacts of a mobile broadband supply shortage on other industries might be more significant. Mobile business applications are already used extensively in nearly every industry and are becoming increasingly indispensable for standard business activities. Further, even as human use of mobile data continues to expand, it pales in comparison to anticipated growth in the --Internet of Things‖  --  much of which will be wirelessly enabled. 
Bullish industry forecasts include an estimate of 26 billion installed Internet of things 
units by 2020, impacting the global supply chain, and a prediction of 24 billion connected devices globally by 2016, resulting in a $1.2 trillion impact to North American economies from revenues, cost reductions, or service improvements. 
1543. Phil Wilson, (Deloitte Technology, Media and Telecommunications director), 
DELOITTE, September 2014, retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www2.deloitte.  [HYPERLINK: http://www2.deloitte/]com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/technology-media-telecommunications/us- tmt-mobile-index-09262014.pdf. If the United States mobile broadband position becomes diminished and weak, it could create opportunities for other countries to 
gain traction in areas of the mobile-enabled Internet of Things. Other countries, by 
tapping into their unique assets or characteristics  --  such as a higher population density or a leading public infrastructure  --  could overtake the United States in specific industries or applications such as telematics. mHealth, mCommerce, or mLogistics. Scale this effect across all global competitors and industries and it is likely the collective impacts of conceded leadership in mobile broadband would be substantial for the United States and its economy. Should the United States relinquish its lead in mobile broadband and become just one of several global players, the economic consequences could be severe. On the other hand, if the United States retains its leadership position in mobile broadband, it could also become the market 
leader in a variety of new industry segments that sprout within the Internet of Things. 
In fact, it is not hard to envision a future in which the leading indicators of mobile broadband performance are also leading indicators of overall economic performance. 


1544. Maximillian Curtis, (US State Department), FUTURE FOREIGN POLICY, May 16, 2014 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.futureforeignpolicy.com/the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.futureforeignpolicy.com/the-]global-implications-of-us-internet-regulation/. The Internet is not merely an impressive economic marketplace. In socio-political terms, its overriding feature is the freedom for users to post content and share it globally without excessive interference. Eroding net neutrality principles therefore suggests major challenges for 
global freedom of speech. First, other countries may follow the United States' 
example, opening up new legal avenues for abusing free speech and limiting economic competition. State-owned enterprises in China, for instance, could see far faster internet speeds than their private sector competitors, and governments elsewhere could potentially limit access to online information about opposition parties and dissidents. If the US will not abide by net neutrality and the egalitarian principles it stands for, why should less democratic countries not do the same? Second, foreign governments and interests groups could eventually face roadblocks to reaching the American public through the Internet. In an age where public 
diplomacy and social media have played a major role in fostering international 
cooperation and even nuclear deals, net neutrality ensures that data from other countries is treated equally with domestically-produced data. The US and its ISPs could prioritize access to American sites, limiting access to political speech or economic competitors from abroad. 
1545. Fred Trotter, (DocGraph journal founder), FCC TESTIMONY, Aug. 5, 2014 
retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://engine.is/wp-content/uploads/Reply-Comments-  [HYPERLINK: http://engine.is/wp-content/uploads/Reply-Comments-]of-Fred-Trotter-of-the-DocGraph-Journal.pdf. Pretty ironic, isn't it? Telemedicine is the solution to our current real-world fast lane/slow lane problem. Using 
telemedicine, we can get the same high levels of treatment to people no matter if they 
own a car or not. But all of these programs, presume an Internet built with net neutrality. If we abandon net neutrality, someone is going to have to pay the fast lane tax for patients who want telemedicine solutions to really work. That means either patients are going to pay, or doctors are going to have to pay. Having an Internet slow lane will ensure that poor patients will not be able to have video telemedicine appointments (which operate just like streaming video) because their doctors do not have the technical expertise or budget to afford the Internet fast lane. Think I am kidding? Already the Office of the National Coordinator of Health IT(ONC) has seen that hospitals and practices that serve in minority communities are late adopters of 
healthcare technology. 
1546. Fred Trotter, (DocGraph journal founder), FCC TESTIMONY, Aug. 5, 2014 
retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://engine.is/wp-content/uploads/Reply-Comments-  [HYPERLINK: http://engine.is/wp-content/uploads/Reply-Comments-]of-Fred-Trotter-of-the-DocGraph-Journal.pdf. Digital healthcare interventions are designed to relieve the types of problems that make life unlivable. These interventions will include using the Internet to monitor complex healthcare devices. They will include telemedicine between not only doctors and patients, but patients and mental health professionals, and patients with other patients. They will include innovative audio solutions, social media systems and health focused websites. It is 
impossible to overestimate the importance of these digital interventions. The 
expenses in the US healthcare system are out of control, if they continue to raise unchecked they will [collapse] cripple our entire economy. The quality of the US healthcare system is substantially lower than other first world countries, despite many of the most modern medical techniques being born in the US. These concepts are already deeply embedded in the policies of the Obamacare healthcare reform efforts. Obamacare has made significant investments in Health IT, spending over $24 billion on the effort. Health IT investments are one of several areas where Romneycare and Obamacare did not differ. 
1547. Brian Costello, (MD and independent health care consultant), TALKING 
POINTS MEMO, Feb. 3, 2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://talkingpoints  [HYPERLINK: http://talkingpoints/]memo.com/cafe/hey-obama-you-cant-talk-about-the-economy-without-talking-about- healthcare. Fast-forward 15 years, and we are finally showing signs of recovery. As President Obama highlighted in the SOTU, our unemployment rate has dipped to pre- recession levels, the economy is growing as fast as it has in a decade, and the rise in health care costs has finally slowed down. This is great news, but the president also made it clear that we are not yet out of the woods. We still need to achieve wage growth -- for those of us not making $250,000 per year -- and improve income 
equality. This aspirational economy is linked to health care spending, but 
unfortunately this link is not always appreciated in the dialogue shaping economic policy. 
1548. Brian Costello, (MD and independent health care consultant), TALKING 
POINTS MEMO, Feb. 3, 2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://talkingpoints  [HYPERLINK: http://talkingpoints/]memo.com/cafe/hey-obama-you-cant-talk-about-the-economy-without-talking-about- healthcare. The think tank Center for American Progress (CAP) recently released a report that will likely frame the economic platform of Hillary Clinton in her inevitable 2016 presidential bid. With contributions by Larry Summers, the Secretary of the Treasury under Bill Clinton, and a veritable who's who of economists from around the globe, the report chases down the causes of wage growth and economic inequality for certain Organisation of Economic Development (OECD) countries. Notably, the report makes detailed economic policy suggestions for the U.S. But absent from this report is an examination of the impact of health care costs on wages and prosperity. To discuss our current economic reality without referencing the rise in health care costs is like talking about declining birth rates without mentioning birth control. You can have a robust dialogue, but it paints an incomplete picture. Many of us are familiar with the astronomical rise in health care costs from $1.3 trillion in 2000 to $2.9 trillion in 2013, and it does not take a PhD to figure out that this is going 
to impact the economy. What can get obscured is how exactly this escalation affects 
it. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	12 1 
 
 
 
1549. Brian Costello, (MD and independent health care consultant), TALKING POINTS MEMO, Feb. 3, 2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://talkingpoints  [HYPERLINK: http://talkingpoints/]memo.com/cafe/hey-obama-you-cant-talk-about-the-economy-without-talking-about- healthcare. Rising healthcare costs erased a decade's worth of middle-income wage growth. Had health care costs risen with inflation from 2000 to 2009, as explained in an article in Health Affairs, a median-income American family of four would have had $5,400 extra dollars to spend per year. During the State of the Union, the president noted that the typical American family will have $750 extra this year thanks to low gas prices. The $5,400 that would have come with controlling the rise in health care costs is seven times that amount. These lost pay-increases due to rising insurance premiums disproportionately affect lower income individuals, contributing significantly to income inequality. The Wall Streeter making $250,000 per year loses less of a potential 5 percent raise to the higher cost of benefits than the middle class worker making $50,000. 
1550. Brian Costello, (MD and independent health care consultant), TALKING 
POINTS MEMO, Feb. 3, 2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://talkingpoints  [HYPERLINK: http://talkingpoints/]memo.com/cafe/hey-obama-you-cant-talk-about-the-economy-without-talking-about- healthcare. It is not simply the costs of healthcare that impact our economic outlook. When health insurance is moored to employment, it decreases job mobility. And job mobility is critical to wage growth and entrepreneurship. When people can leave their 
jobs without fear of losing health insurance, employers have to pay more to retain 
them. Also, affordable outside-the-office healthcare enables more people to take the entrepreneurial plunge. The Affordable Care Act does improve this situation. Market- rate insurance is available outside of the workplace for all. But many in the middle class who do not qualify for subsidies still find insurance too costly. And although it's good news in that the rise in health care costs has slowed down, health care cost growth still outpaces inflation. Moreover, a slowdown in growth is not the same as the needed decrease in healthcare costs. If the cost of a gallon of gas rose quickly to 
$10 per gallon and then stopped rising as fast, the fact that gas still costs $10 per 
gallon would continue to wreak havoc on the economy. 
1551. Brian Costello, (MD and independent health care consultant), TALKING 
POINTS MEMO, Feb. 3, 2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://talkingpoints  [HYPERLINK: http://talkingpoints/]memo.com/cafe/hey-obama-you-cant-talk-about-the-economy-without-talking-about- healthcare. Something less sinister is more likely to be behind this negligence, and it's something that is not unique to this report. The more nuanced connections of health care to the economy are viewed as a piece of the health care debate, but not our 
economic debate. This is problematic. It has been well established that health care 
policy needs to include economic realities in order for us to escape the current quagmire. Acting as if the economy and health care function independent from one another ripened the environment for the escalation of health care costs in the first decade of this millennium. Leaving health care out of the center of our discussion about wage growth and inequality will lead to an incomplete policy. This type of economic policy will leave us similarly scrambling for solutions at the end of the second decade of this millennium. If we want to party like it's 1999, then we need to have not just a health policy considering the economy, but an economic policy that considers health care. This may actually enable us to return to those fun-loving-pre- 
apocalyptic times that Prince sang about. 
1552. Laura DeNardis, (American University communication professor), THE 
GLOBAL WAR FOR INTERNET GOVERNANCE, 2014, 157. Private intermediaries have increasingly become the arbiters of online expressive liberty. This arbitration of freedom of expression occurs in several ways. Information aggregators and other platforms receive a constant barrage of government requests to censor content, whether for political gain, law enforcement, or other reason. The phenomenon of a company removing user content at the behest of a government is known as delegated censorship, a subject treated in detail in Chapter 9. Companies also choose to take down or block specific content for other reasons including 


1554. Laura DeNardis, (American University communication professor), THE GLOBAL WAR FOR INTERNET GOVERNANCE, 2014, 161. Although these content questions are critical, a different set of controversies and battles occurred at the level of infrastructure governance and intermediation. EveryDNS, the institution providing Wiki Leaks with free DNS resolution services, decided to terminate these services, essentially disrupting WikiLeaks's online presence. The WikiLeaks site had been the target of extensive denial of service attacks and EveryDNS claimed that it terminated service to WikiLeaks in accordance with its acceptable use policy so that the DDoS attacks would not affect services to other customers. Amazon similarly cited its terms of service as a justification to discontinue hosting the WikiLeaks web site on its servers because of the publishing of materials that could endanger individuals. The company specifically explained that it had made its decision independently of any perceived government pressure to block WikiLeaks: There have been reports that a government inquiry prompted us not to serve WikiLeaks any longer. That is inaccurate. In WikiLeaks was able to quickly establish an online presence at wikileaks.ch, but this example serves as a reminder of the concentrated power of private ordering, rather than governmental forces, in determining who is 
allowed an online presence 
1555. Laura DeNardis, (American University communication professor), THE 
GLOBAL WAR FOR INTERNET GOVERNANCE, 2014, 162. Financial intermediaries also privately made decisions to interrupt the flow of funding to WikiLeaks because of the controversy. As an example, PayPal stated that it was permanently restricting the account used by WikiLeaks because of a violation of the PayPal Acceptable Use Policy prohibiting use of its payment service for any sites that encourage illegal activity. PayPal's general counsel suggested that the company made this decision after the U.S. Department of State released a statement that WikiLeaks possessed documents provided in violation of U.S. law. The general counsel also stated that PayPal was not contacted by any government organization but rather restricted the account based on its Acceptable Use Policy review. In an information society, the ability to delete an online presence or stop the flow of money to a site is significant power. There are concentrated control points online and these points of control are in the hands of private industry. 
1556. J. Michael Daniel, (National Security Council cybersecurity coordinator), 
POLITICO, Feb. 4, 2015 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.politico.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.politico.com/]magazine/story/2015/02/china-cybersecurity-114875.html - .VUE34yFVhBd. Cyber threats are becoming more diverse, sophisticated and dangerous. Over the past year, we have seen an exponential increase in the number of commercial data breaches and the theft of trade secrets. Malicious actors have proven increasingly willing to disrupt or destroy computers and networks through cyber attacks. And all of this is happening in an environment where we are connecting more and more things to the Internet, from thermostats to power plants. These trends should be a call to action for both the United States and China, the world's two largest economies, to work 
together to improve cybersecurity globally. Like the United States, China has a 
legitimate interest in improving the cybersecurity of its computers and networks and protecting its citizens and businesses from the threats posed by malicious cyber actors. But aspects of China's actions, including the direction of their recently announced regulations -- which have been billed as a means to promote better cybersecurity -- are not the answer. China's new rules require technology companies doing business with banks to demonstrate that their products are --secure and controllable‖ by, among other things, making their source code available to the Chinese government, providing the Chinese government with back doors in software 
and hardware and requiring localization of foreign intellectual property to China. Not 
only are these regulations inconsistent with international cybersecurity best practices, they are anticompetitive trade barriers. 
1557. J. Michael Daniel, (National Security Council cybersecurity coordinator), 
POLITICO, Feb. 4, 2015 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.politico.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.politico.com/]

concerns about reputational harm to the institution or values and norms embedded in 	magazine/story/2015/02/china-cybersecurity-114875.html 	-	.VUE34yFVhBd. 

end user agreements. Private adjudication of expression can also be enacted through gatekeeping of the apps and software the user is permitted to access via platform- specific repositories (for example, Apple's App Store) operated by the private intermediary. Finally, transactional and financial intermediaries have the autonomy to cease providing these services to customers or sites they find objection-able or which violate the terms of their end user licensing agreements. The following explains these distinct contexts in which private ordering, rather man (or in addition to) laws, norms, or governments, determines the conditions of freedom of expression in the public sphere. 
1553. Laura DeNardis, (American University communication professor), THE 
GLOBAL WAR FOR INTERNET GOVERNANCE, 2014, 157-8. Although companies are subject to the laws in the various jurisdictions in which they operate, there is a significant discrepancy between the number of requests they receive from governments and the number of requests they actually carry out. This differential illustrates the discretionary policy role private companies assume. The --Innocence of Muslims‖ video case highlights the intractable challenges that companies face in trying to strike a balance between the often conflicting variables of their own content guidelines, government requests, public perception, and concern about both freedom of expression and public safety. Private intermediaries perform a governance function when they enact censorship (either requested by a government or of their own volition) or carry out a law enforcement function. Even more so, they wield significant governance power when they use their discretionary authority to not carry out censorship requests. 
Requirements that commercial intellectual property and research and development facilities are located in a specific country run counter to the principles of free and open trade that has both supported the global economy and aided China's rapid 
economic growth over the past several decades. Our companies should be able to sell 
their innovative products in China, and innovative Chinese companies want to do business here in the United States. As governments, both the United States and China shouldn't undermine that engagement -- we should encourage and protect it. Such regulations will also limit the inflow of the latest internationally-tested secure technologies into the Chinese market and diminish our collective efforts to improve cybersecurity worldwide. 
1558. Julius Genachowski, (FCC chairman), FOREIGN POLICY, April 16, 2013 
retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://foreignpolicy.com/2013/04/16/the-plot-to-block-  [HYPERLINK: http://foreignpolicy.com/2013/04/16/the-plot-to-block-]
internet-freedom/. Sender pays may look merely like a commercial issue, a different 
way to divide the pie. And proponents of sender pays and similar changes claim they would benefit Internet deployment and Internet users. But the opposite is true: If a country imposed a payment requirement, content creators would be less likely to serve that country. The loss of content would make the Internet less attractive and would lessen demand for the deployment of Internet infrastructure in that country. Repeat the process in a few more countries, and the growth of global connectivity - as well as its attendant benefits for democracy - would slow dramatically. So too would the benefits accruing to the global economy. Without continuing improvements in transparency and information sharing, the innovation that springs 
from new commercial ideas and creative breakthroughs is sure to be severely 
inhibited. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	12 2 
 
 
 
1559. Joel Simon, (Committee to Protect Journalists), THE NEW CENSORSHIP: INSIDE THE GLOBAL BATTLE FOR MEDIA FREEDOM, 2014, 110. The threat to the global Internet is not imminent, but it is growing and multifaceted. While the possibility of China and other Internet-restricting countries handing Internet governance to the United Nations is still remote, its effect would be --catastrophic,‖ says MacKinnon, who believes UN governance would represent the end of the Internet as a shared global resource. The fact that more and more people around the world are accessing the Web through mobile devices rather than broadband already gives governments more direct control, since wireless networks are more easily monitored and censored. A more immediate concern is that China's international advocacy is helping advance its argument that the restrictions governments impose on the domestic Internet are legitimate in an international context. Experts are expressing increased alarm about the possible emergence of a --Splinternet,‖ with divergent national systems that arc not fully connected. --Around the world countries are increasingly restricting the Internet and seeking to bring it under state control,‖ notes Dan Gillmor, an author and Internet expert. 
1560. Joel Simon, (Committee to Protect Journalists), THE NEW CENSORSHIP: 
INSIDE THE GLOBAL BATTLE FOR MEDIA FREEDOM, 2014, 110. China's ability to construct a domestic Internet with its own norms has global security implications that go beyond its leadership of the antilibertarian movement and its example to authoritarian regimes. This is because as China becomes more adept at managing information domestically, it also disrupts the flow of information across borders. China's economic and political health, of course, is central to the world economy, yet the government suppresses information on everything from major political developments to mundane economic data. In August 2012, the New York Times reported that as exports had slowed and domestic demand slackened, many industries were accumulating a massive backlog of unsold inventory. Yet the Chinese government sought to obscure the extent of the problem by, for example, halting the release of data about new car registration. 
1561. J. Michael Daniel, (National Security Council cybersecurity coordinator), 
POLITICO, Feb. 4, 2015 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.politico.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.politico.com/]magazine/story/2015/02/china-cybersecurity-114875.html - .VUE34yFVhBd. The United States believes that the Internet's success proves the value and sustainability of a governance model that involves the active and equal participation of all stakeholders -- governments, businesses and civil society. The top-down, government- 
led approach advocated by China and others for managing the future of the Internet is 
fundamentally flawed. Such an approach would slow the pace of technological innovation and disadvantage entrepreneurs in both the United States and China who rely upon the Internet to run their businesses, communicate with their customers and conduct online commerce. Finally, we believe that nation-states have responsibilities in cyberspace, just as they do elsewhere, to abide by certain standards of behavior. That is why the United States remains deeply concerned about China's continuing and indisputable government-sponsored cyber theft from companies and commercial sectors around the world for Chinese companies' advantage. The United States does 
not engage in these types of activities. This behavior is adversely affecting the 
fundamentals of the U.S.-China relationship, harming the ties of our business community, tarnishing Chinese firms' international image, and at a broader level, undermining the basic foundations of free and fair commerce. That is why China's government-sponsored cyber theft for commercial gain is not just a U.S.-China issue. It is an issue of concern to countries around the world. It needs to stop. 
1562. Joel Simon, (Committee to Protect Journalists), THE NEW CENSORSHIP: 
INSIDE THE GLOBAL BATTLE FOR MEDIA FREEDOM, 2014, 111. Basic information about a variety of issues with a global impact -- from environmental degradation to food safety -- is censored online. The government routinely withholds data about air quality in Beijing and actively suppresses information -- including on micro-blogs -- about popular demonstrations against pollution, like the 2011 mass demonstrations against a chemical plant in Dalian. Food safety issues -- from tainted milk, to exploding watermelons treated with growth hormones, to waste oil resold to restaurants for cooking -- are routinely censored or covered up. Even more alarmingly is that there is some evidence that Chinese government censorship is undermining the integrity of the global Internet, according to the blogger and technologist Isaac Mao. Internet users from Chile to California who carry out searches in Chinese can be routed through servers inside China -- and thus caught in the country's censorship web. --People living in New York City who try to study Chinese would hit the wall when websites include some ‗sensitive words,'-- Mao explained. 
1563. Joel Simon, (Committee to Protect Journalists), THE NEW CENSORSHIP: 
INSIDE THE GLOBAL BATTLE FOR MEDIA FREEDOM, 2014, 111. Even as the overheated Chinese economy begins to cool, China continues to provide a powerful alternative vision of the role of information and media. It's a vision that has an obvious resonance in many parts of the world. While Ai Weiwei's dream may yet come true, there is also a nightmare scenario in which governments around the world continue both to strengthen their ability to manage and control the Internet and to build the international support to do so. The result could be that information would be managed and manipulated not only for citizens of repressive regimes but at least hypothetically for Internet users everywhere. This is obviously a grave threat to the current system of global news and information upon which people around the world depend. 
1564. Anna Murline, (Christian Science Monitor staff writer), CHRISTIAN 
SCIENCE MONITOR, Feb. 20, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from 
http://www.csmonitor.com/World/Security-Watch/2014/0220/Pentagon-pushes-for-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.csmonitor.com/World/Security-Watch/2014/0220/Pentagon-pushes-for-]
more-bandwidth-citing-national-security-needs. The Pentagon Thursday released its 
strategy for securing the electromagnetic spectrum, which includes a heavy warning about the dangers of not getting it right. The electromagnetic spectrum is what the Pentagon and the telecommunications industry both use to communicate. In the case of the US military, that includes the airwaves it needs to download the nearly continuous stream of surveillance video from drones, to communicate between fighter jet pilots and ground forces, or to send secure information between soldiers in the field using mobile phones and tablets. The Pentagon's demand for these airwaves has been voracious, and it has only grown during a decade of war. In 2002, the US 
military operated 167 unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), for example. By 2010, that 
figure had grown to 7,500, noted Maj. Gen. Robert Wheeler, the Pentagon's deputy 
chief information officer, during a briefing Thursday to unveil the new strategy. 


1565. Aaron Mehta, (Defense News reporter), DEFENSE NEWS, March 31, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.defensenews.com/article/20130331/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.defensenews.com/article/20130331/]DEFFEAT02/303310009/Pentagon-Seeks-Solutions-UAV-Bandwidth-Crunch. With the growing use of UAVs, DoD has frequently found itself short on the bandwidth needed for missions. Military satellites such as the Defense Satellite Communications System and Milstar do not have the capacity to handle the massive growth of UAV 
use. In those situations, they buy bandwidth from commercial satellite providers. As 
much as 90 percent of UAV bandwidth being used in Iraq and Afghanistan was being purchased from commercial satellite companies, according to industry figures. It's an expensive process, and one industry executives have been trying to change for years. Rather than pay premiums case by case, they argue, the government should establish a baseline for required UAV bandwidth and enter long-term agreements for the use. It would lower the cost for taxpayers while providing a consistent source of revenue for the providers. 
1566. Elinor Rushforth, (Arizona JD candidate), ARIZONA JOURNAL OF 
INTERNATIONAL & COMPARATIVE LAW, 2012, retrieved April 29, 2015 from Lexis. Arguments Made by Proponents of the Drone Program: The drone program is a fixture in the Obama administration's fight against terror and the moral and legal defense the administration offers serves as an indication that these attacks will continue. Further, proponents of the drone program argue their use reduces risk to U.S. service members, decreases American weariness at foreign intervention, and minimizes civilian casualties during attacks and missions. 
1567. Elinor Rushforth, (Arizona JD candidate), ARIZONA JOURNAL OF 
INTERNATIONAL & COMPARATIVE LAW, 2012, retrieved April 29, 2015 from Lexis. First, because asymmetric warfare has increased, the United States has sought out creative ways to fight terrorists, insurgents, and asymmetric wars more generally. Despite controversy surrounding the drone program, it allows surveillance and lethal missions without putting U.S. troops in harm's way. This is an almost incontrovertible positive factor when considering American public support for a new and technologically incredible program. Due to the lingering Overseas Contingency Operations, Americans are eager for some good news, and this program can deliver. Drone operators are on the front lines of a new and more sophisticated type of war and the information their surveillance missions provide can prove invaluable to service members on the ground. This dual benefit weighs heavily in favor of drone proliferation. Drones can be deployed to survey and attack where it would otherwise be impractical for troops, and a single pilot, to venture. 
1568. Elinor Rushforth, (Arizona JD candidate), ARIZONA JOURNAL OF 
INTERNATIONAL & COMPARATIVE LAW, 2012, retrieved April 29, 2015 from Lexis. During Operation Southern Watch, the military used drones to police no-fly zones in Iraq and they were eventually used to target Iraqi radar systems during the second Iraq War. In Operation Enduring Freedom, the military has expanded its use of armed drones to provide air support to ground operations and to act as --killer scouts.‖ By providing immediate battle damage assessment, drones enable commanders to determine if further action is necessary, and provide a new perspective on the field. In Operation Iraqi Freedom, the armed drone retained and expanded its roles targeting anti-aircraft vehicles, performing as a decoy revealing enemy positions, and aiding in a rescue mission. Based on these successes, military leaders maintain the value of drones. The CIA's use of drones facilitates U.S. attacks in environments where it is deemed too dangerous for ground troops to have a physical presence. The ability to protect American lives, keep military costs down, and damage terrorist infrastructure and leadership is central to proponents' view of this program. 
1569. Elinor Rushforth, (Arizona JD candidate), ARIZONA JOURNAL OF 
INTERNATIONAL & COMPARATIVE LAW, 2012, retrieved April 29, 2015 from Lexis. Second, the American public has grown tired of drawn-out conflicts and foreign intervention, and the drone program offers a more palatable form of foreign involvement. President Obama claims that --it is time to focus on nation-building here at home‖ and, presumably, the drone program allows the government to operate without deployment of ground troops to areas in which intervention is deemed necessary, be it for humanitarian or military purposes. Lethal operations, surveillance for U.S. military operations, and less costly intervention all become possible when robots are the actual tools. With a weary electorate, the Executive can maintain a presence abroad militarily, while remaining able to argue that its full focus is on protecting and growing our nation at home. 
1570. Peter Schwartz, (Global Business Network co-founder), HUFFINGTON POST, 
Nov. 22, 2014 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/peter_  [HYPERLINK: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/peter_]
schwartz/end-of-internet_b_5856168.html. I remember carrying around all the devices I needed to use to connect to the early Internet because of a variety of technical standards. The Internet was created to take the friction out of digital communications, whether those borders were university boundaries or national borders. The digital borders will begin to rise and with it the cost of doing everything will begin to grow. The nations of the world will once again begin to diverge. Economies of scale will disappear. A HIGH FRICTION FUTURE As we disconnect, nationalism is likely to grow. We will be in a high friction world with the 
opportunities for conflict growing fast. It is a recipe for poverty and war. Just as 
Smoot-Hawley was a staggeringly self-destructive act that made the Great Depression much worse, so the fragmentation of the Internet driven by the desire for national control will accelerate the end of the second era of globalization. 
1571. Adam Scholl, (World Policy Journal editorial associate), WORLD POLICY 
JOURNAL, Sept. 25, 2012 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.worldpolicy. org/blog/2012/09/25/problem-internet-regulation. Technological innovation, needless to say, is accelerating. At last Thursday's Blouin Creative Leadership Summit in New York City, speakers on two panels -- Innovation Economies: Technology and the 
Creation of New Organizations and Cyber Security: National Priorities, Personal 
Concern -- offered recommendations for dealing with this acceleration. Though the cyber security panelists were more conflicted, there was general agreement by both sets of speakers that governments should facilitate technological progress by leaving people alone. With a hive mind of hundreds of millions of users, an open Internet will almost always respond more quickly and effectively than a government to threats or changes in the virtual landscape. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	12 3 
 
 
 
1572 Adam Scholl, (World Policy Journal editorial associate), WORLD POLICY JOURNAL, Sept. 25, 2012 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.worldpolicy. org/blog/2012/09/25/problem-internet-regulation. Digital autonomy was not quite so lauded at the cyber security panel. All agreed that cyber threats pose real danger, that information networks are increasingly becoming battlefields, and that protective steps must be taken as a result. From government cyber-warfare and cyber-espionage projects like the Flame and Stuxnet viruses to the anti-secrecy projects of WikiLeaks, the Internet creates new and constantly evolving risks for state security. Still, as governments across the globe work to secure themselves from these novel threats, some panelists suggested that it would be unwise to emulate the security strategies of the past. --A certain degree of openness  can actually have benefits in terms of security, and privacy as well,‖ said Eddan Katz of Yale Law School's Information Society Project. The Internet acts like an ecosystem, responding unpredictably to regulatory interference, he contended, so it should not be monitored and controlled in the name of security like physical spaces. 
1573. Adam Scholl, (World Policy Journal editorial associate), WORLD POLICY 
JOURNAL, Sept. 25, 2012 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.worldpolicy. org/blog/2012/09/25/problem-internet-regulation. There is hardly agreement, however, on whether such changes would even help secure the Internet at all. Complex digital systems aside, it is extremely difficult to secure even ordinary physical spaces. NYU Professor Harvey Molotch has argued, for example, that the 
billions upon billions of dollars spent on airport security guards, cameras, screening 
equipment, canine units, and more have done more harm than good. Despite the enormous cost and intrusion of these security measures, they often fail to detect threats, as evidenced by a TSA test operation in 2006 when screeners missed 20 out of 22 guns or bombs brought through security by undercover agents. If America's best security teams can barely prevent the physical, unchanging threat of an armed human aggressor from entering an airport, they must have dismal odds against ever- evolving and multifaceted cyber threats. Cyber security measures seem often destined for futility or, worse, for counter-productivity. 
1574. Adam Scholl, (World Policy Journal editorial associate), WORLD POLICY 
JOURNAL, Sept. 25, 2012 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.worldpolicy. org/blog/2012/09/25/problem-internet-regulation. But the takeaway here is not that these bureaucrats were ignorant -- it's that such ignorance is inevitable given the incredibly complex and constantly changing nature of the Internet. To see why, consider the difficulty of regulating the Internet compared to the difficulty of regulating, say, bridges. While some bridges get built to nowhere and others collapse into rivers, most Americans benefit most of the time from bridges built and maintained by the government. While regulating this infrastructure is complicated, 
there are a static number of bridges in the country, which exist in fixed locations and 
age slowly and predictably over time. Trying to regulate the Internet, on the other hand, would be like trying to manage a transportation system in which not only new roads but new types of roads, and new types of vehicles, and new types of fuel, are invented each day. And the roads move, and hide. And some roads connect Alabama to Estonia, and are filled with invisible bandits. Whatever one's moral opinion of Internet piracy, it can claim little legal justification and has wealthy opponents. This issue, like the threat of cyber-attack, has and will continue to tempt states to intrusively regulate the Internet, even at the level of its physical infrastructure. Iran's announcement last month of a self-contained, countrywide intranet system is only the latest example. States should keep in mind, though, that unlike transportation networks, the Internet is complex enough to react like an ecosystem. Disturbing parts without understanding the whole will lead to unexpected and undesirable results. 
1575. Laura DeNardis, (American University communication professor), THE 
GLOBAL WAR FOR INTERNET GOVERNANCE, 2014, 16-7. The preservation of the Internet's stability and security parallels other global collective action problems 
that have cumulative effects on all nations. Some of these global problems obviously 
include environmental protection, the prevention of terrorism, the eradication of infectious diseases, and the protection of human rights. Similar to these global collective action problems, the regional value of Internet infrastructure is dependent on the network effects afforded by globally coordinated Inter-net governance functions. Universal and consistent technical standards are the common denominator enabling interoperability among computing devices. The international coordination of Internet names and numbers ensures that each is globally unique. Cooperation at Internet interconnection points collectively creates the Internet's global backbone. Globally coordinated responses to Internet worms and viruses collectively minimize the impact of new cybersecurity threats. International trade agreements provide coordinated enforcement of intellectual property rights. 
1576. Laura DeNardis, (American University communication professor), THE 
GLOBAL WAR FOR INTERNET GOVERNANCE, 2014, 17. The local value of stable and secure global Internet governance is inestimable in contemporary societies dependent on networked technologies to handle basic business transactions, the movement of currency, and the exchange of financial securities. The amount of money changing hands electronically measures in the trillions range annually. Social life is also intertwined with digital life. Reputation systems serve as social currency. Couples meet in online dating sites and social life materializes in social media platforms. Press freedom and individual freedom of expression alike are dependent on online infrastructures and the policies enacted to preserve both liberty and infrastructure reliability. Political campaigns rely on Internet-based fundraising and communication with voters. Law enforcement and national security efforts use digital infrastructures for data gathering and information warfare. No less than economic security, modern social life, culture, political discourse, and national security are at stake in keeping the Internet globally operational and secure. 


1577. James Gentile, (Dean, Applied Science, Hope College), HUFFINGTON POST, Sept. 12, 2012 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/james-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/james-]m-gentile/accepting-the-challenge-o_b_1870744.html. Science and technology have fueled America's standing as a global superpower, and the millions of jobs that flow from that leadership. Yet the place of science in America's future is publicly debated now perhaps more than at any time since the Scopes Trial of 1925 - the landmark 
legal case over the right to teach evolution in school. The consequences of not 
maintaining our national commitment to science, however, are greater than ever - for American economic preeminence, for our own standard of living, and for humankind. That's why Research Corporation for Science Advancement - the nation's oldest foundation devoted wholly to science, which I have the honor of leading - has made a renewed commitment in this our centennial year to being in the forefront of science advocacy: for scientific research, for transformational science, and for science education. Globally, there is urgency to the situation, as the world depends increasingly on the scientific breakthroughs for which the United States is legendary. 
The population of the underdeveloped world is projected to increase by 2.9 billion by 
2050, and that growth is likely to add exponentially to problems of health maintenance and disease control. Of the 7 billion people on earth, 854 million, or 
12.6 percent, are already undernourished, according to the United Nations Food and 
Agriculture Organization, and in many countries clean water is in short supply. 
1578. Robert Tilford, (Wichita Military Affairs Examiner), EXAMINER, July 27, 
2012 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.examiner.com/article/cyber-attackers-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.examiner.com/article/cyber-attackers-]could-easily-shut-down-the-electric-grid-for-the-entire-east-coa. To make matters 
worse a cyber attack that can take out a civilian power grid, for example could also 
cripple demolish the U.S. military. The senator notes that is that the same power grids that supply cities and towns, stores and gas stations, cell towers and heart monitors also power --every military base in our country.‖ --Although bases would be prepared to weather a short power outage with backup diesel generators, within hours, not days, fuel supplies would run out‖, he said. Which means military command and control centers could go dark. Radar systems that detect air threats to our country would shut Down completely. --Communication between commanders and their troops would also go silent. And many weapons systems would be left without either 
fuel or electric power‖, said Senator Grassley. --So in a few short hours or days, the 
mightiest military in the world would be left scrambling to maintain base functions‖, he said. 
1579. Robert Tilford, (Wichita Military Affairs Examiner), EXAMINER, July 27, 
2012 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.examiner.com/article/cyber-attackers-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.examiner.com/article/cyber-attackers-]could-easily-shut-down-the-electric-grid-for-the-entire-east-coa. We contacted the Pentagon and officials confirmed the threat of a cyber attack is something very real. Top national security officials -- including the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, the Director of the National Security Agency, the Secretary of Defense, and the CIA 
Director -- have said, --preventing a cyber attack and improving the nation's electric 
grids is among the most urgent priorities of our country‖ (source: Congressional Record). So how serious is the Pentagon taking all this? Enough to start, or end a war over it, for sure. A cyber attack today against the US could very well be seen as an --Act of War‖ and could be met with a --full scale‖ US military response. That could include the use of --nuclear weapons‖, if authorized by the President. 
1580. Alvin Felzenberg (George Washington international affairs lecturer), 
NATIONAL REVIEW, Jan. 3, 2011, retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.nationalreview.com/articles/print/256150. Should [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationalreview.com/articles/print/256150] China conclude, on the 
other hand, that the United States intends to turn inward, it may grow even more 
ambitious and assertive in its region and beyond, potentially menacing world peace. Its smaller neighbors nervously wait to see how the United States will respond to China's growing assertiveness. Should they come to believe that the U.S. is in retreat, they will make their own accommodations with Beijing. That result would wreak irreparable damage both to America's economy and to its security. 
1581. Alvin Felzenberg, (George Washington international affairs lecturer), 
NATIONAL REVIEW, Jan. 3, 2011, retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.nationalreview.com/articles/print/256150. A [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationalreview.com/articles/print/256150] world in which the United 
States willingly ceded power and influence would both be more dangerous and prove 
less receptive to values that most Americans share, such as respect for human rights, the need to restrain governments through the rule of law, and the sanctity of contracts. By reducing its military strength to alarmingly low levels, the United States would create dangerous power vacuums around the world that other nations, with entirely different values, would be only too happy to fill. That, as history shows, would make war more, rather than less, likely. Congress and the president would do well to reflect on those lessons and remember their duty to provide a dominant American military presence on land, at sea, and in the air. 
1582. Chas Freeman, (served in United States Foreign Service thirty years), CHAS 
FREEMAN, Sept. 13, 2014 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://chasfreeman.net/a-  [HYPERLINK: http://chasfreeman.net/a-]
new-set-of-great-power-relationships/. We live in a time of great strategic fluidity. Borders are shifting. Lines of control are blurring. Long-established spheres of influence are fading away. Some states are decaying and dissolving as others germinate and take root. The global economic order is precarious. New economic and geopolitical fault lines are emerging. The great powers of North and South America are barely on speaking terms. Europe is again riven by geopolitical antagonisms. Ukraine should be a prosperous, independent borderland between the European Union and Russia. It has instead become a cockpit of strategic contention. The United 
States and Russia have relapsed into hostility. The post-Ottoman borders of West 
Asia and North Africa are being erased. Neither Europeans, nor Russians, nor Americans can now protect or direct their longstanding clients in the Middle East. Brazil, China, and India are peacefully competing for the favor of Africa. But, in the Indo-Pacific, China and Japan are at daggers drawn and striving to ostracize each other. Sino-American relations seem to be following US-Russian relations into mutual exasperation and intransigence. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	12 4 
 
 
1583. Michael E. O'Hanlon, (Brookings foreign policy director of research), 
BROOKINGS, July 10, 2012 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.brookings. edu/research/opinions/2012/07/10-economy-foreign-policy-lieberthal-ohanlon. 
Lastly, American economic weakness undercuts U.S. leadership abroad. Other countries sense our weakness and wonder about our purported decline. If this perception becomes more widespread, and the case that we are in decline becomes more persuasive, countries will begin to take actions that reflect their skepticism about America's future. Allies and friends will doubt our commitment and may pursue nuclear weapons for their own security, for example; adversaries will sense opportunity and be less restrained in throwing around their weight in their own neighborhoods. The crucial Persian Gulf and Western Pacific regions will likely become less stable. Major war will become more likely. 
1584. Michael E. O'Hanlon, (Brookings foreign policy director of research), 
BROOKINGS, July 10, 2012 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.brookings. edu/research/opinions/2012/07/10-economy-foreign-policy-lieberthal-ohanlon. When running for president last time, Obama eloquently articulated big foreign policy visions: healing America's breach with the Muslim world, controlling global climate change, dramatically curbing global poverty through development aid, moving 
toward a world free of nuclear weapons. These were, and remain, worthy if elusive 
goals. However, for Obama or his successor, there is now a much more urgent big- picture issue: restoring U.S. economic strength. Nothing else is really possible if that fundamental prerequisite to effective foreign policy is not reestablished. 
1585. Martin Armstrong, (Princeton Economics International former chairman), 
USAWATCHDOG, Sept. 14, 2014 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://usawatch  [HYPERLINK: http://usawatch/]dog.com/violent-war-cycles-global-economic-decline-martin-armstrong-4/. Why all the violence around the world? Armstrong contends, --When everyone is fat and happy, nobody cares. Everybody lives together peacefully. When you turn the 
economy down, that's when people start getting mad. They lost something, and they 
want to blame somebody else for whatever injury they suffered. We look at the entire world . . . what you are looking at on a global scale is the emerging markets: China, Russia, South America, Brazil, South East Asia, their stock markets peaked in 2007. They have been in a declining economic trend . . . so you have the economic pressure building. This is what's going on in Russia as well. We are making a serious mistake by thinking that Russia can't fight. My sources say that they anticipated the sanctions on Putin would make the oligarchs turn against him and force him to back out. That's not going to happen. We are going into a period of economic decline, and whenever 
that happens, government needs an external enemy.‖ So, when markets crashed in 
2007, what did Congress do? They did investigations and went after Wall Street. They never admit it has anything to do with them. . . . If Putin were to back off, they would eat him for lunch. He would be overthrown within Russia.‖ [ellipses in 
original] 
1586. Richard Duncan, (former World Bank specialist), THE NEW DEPRESSION: 
THE BREAKDOWN OF THE PAPER MONEY ECONOMY, 2012, 128. The consequences of a New Great Depression would extend far beyond the realm of economics. Hungry people will fight to survive. Governments will use force to maintain internal order at home. This section considers the geopolitical repercussion of economic collapse, beginning with the United States. First, the U.S. government's tax revenues would collapse with the depression. Second, because global trade would shrivel up, other countries would no longer help finance the U.S. budget deficit by buying government bonds because they would no longer have the money to do so. At present, the rest of the world has a $500 billion annual trade surplus with the United States. The central banks of the United States' trading partners accumulate that surplus as foreign exchange reserves and invest most of those reserves into U.S. government bonds. An economic collapse would cause global trade to plummet and drastically reduce (if not eliminate altogether) the U.S. trade deficit. Therefore, this source of foreign funding for the U.S. budget deficit would dry up. 
1587. Richard Duncan, (former World Bank specialist), THE NEW DEPRESSION: 
THE BREAKDOWN OF THE PAPER MONEY ECONOMY, 2012, 128-9. Consequently, the government would have to sharply curtail its spending, both at home and abroad. Domestically, social programs for the old, the sick, and the unemployed would have to be slashed. Government spending on education and infrastructure would also have to be curtailed. Much less government spending would result in a dramatic increase in poverty and, consequently, in crime. This would combine to produce a crisis of the current two-party political system. Astonishment, frustration, and anger at the economic breakdown would radicalize politics. New parties would form at both extremes of the political spectrum. Given the great and growing income inequality going into the crisis, the hungry have-nots would substantially outnumber the remaining wealthy. On the one hand, a hard swing to the left would be the outcome most likely to result from democratic elections. In that case, the tax rates on the top income brackets could be raised to 80 percent or more, a level last seen in 1963. On the other hand, the possibility of a right-wing putsch could not be ruled out. During the Great Depression, the U.S. military was tiny in comparison with what it became during World War II and during the decades of hot, cold, and terrorist wars that followed. In this New Great Depression, it might be the military that ultimately determines how the country would be governed. 
1588. Richard Duncan, (former World Bank specialist), THE NEW DEPRESSION: 
THE BREAKDOWN OF THE PAPER MONEY ECONOMY, 2012, 129. The political battle over America's future would be bitter, and quite possibly bloody. It cannot be guaranteed that the U.S. Constitution would survive. Foreign affairs would also confront the United States with enormous challenges. During the Great Depression, the United States did not have a global empire. Now it does. The United States maintains hundreds of military bases across dozens of countries around the world. Added to this is a fleet of 11 aircraft carriers and 18 nuclear-armed submarines. The country spends more than $650 billion a year on its military. If the U.S. economy collapses into a New Great Depression, the United States could not afford to maintain its worldwide military presence or to continue in its role as global peacekeeper. Or, at least, it could not finance its military in the same way it does at 
present 


1589. Richard Duncan, (former World Bank specialist), THE NEW DEPRESSION: THE BREAKDOWN OF THE PAPER MONEY ECONOMY, 2012, 129-130. In this global depression scenario, the price of oil could collapse to $3 per barrel. Oil consumption would fall by half and there would be no speculators left to manipulate prices higher. Oil at that level would impoverish the oil-producing nations, with extremely destabilizing political consequences. Maintaining control over the Middle East oil fields would become much more difficult for the United States. It would require a much larger military presence than it does now. On the one hand, it might become necessary for the United States to reinstate the draft (which would possibly meet with violent resistance from draftees, as it did during the Vietnam War). On the other hand, America's all-volunteer army might find it had more than enough volunteers with the national unemployment rate in excess of 20 percent. The army might have to be employed to keep order at home, given that mass unemployment would inevitably lead to a sharp spike in crime. 
1590. Richard Duncan, (former World Bank specialist), THE NEW DEPRESSION: 
THE BREAKDOWN OF THE PAPER MONEY ECONOMY, 2012, 130. Only after the Middle East oil was secured would the country know how much more of its global military presence it could afford to maintain. If international trade had broken down, would there be any reason for the United States to keep a military presence in Asia when there was no obvious way to finance that presence? In a global depression, the United States' allies in Asia would most likely be unwilling or unable to finance America's military bases there or to pay for the upkeep of the U.S. Pacific fleet. Nor would the United States have the strength to force them to pay for U.S. protection. Retreat from Asia might become unavoidable. And Europe? What would a cost- benefit analysis conclude about the wisdom of the United States maintaining military bases there? What valued added does Europe provide to the United States? Necessity may mean Europe will have to defend itself. Should a New Great Depression put an end to the Pax Americana, the world would become a much more dangerous place. When the Great Depression began, Japan was the rising industrial power in Asia. It invaded Manchuria in 1931 and conquered much of the rest of Asia in the early 1940s. Would China, Asia's new rising power, behave the same way in the event of a new global economic collapse? Possibly. China is the only nuclear power in Asia east of India (other than North Korea, which is largely a Chinese satellite state). 
1591. Richard Schiffman, (Atlantic Environ. writer), THE ATLANTIC, Sept. 27, 
2013 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/]
2013/09/leading-scientists-weigh-in-on-the-mother-of-all-climate-reports/280045/. 
The IPCC, the indisputable rock star of UN documents, serves as the basis for global climate negotiations, like the ones that took place in Kyoto, Rio, and, more recently, Copenhagen. (The next big international climate meeting is scheduled for 2015 in 
Paris.) It is also arguably the most elaborately vetted and exhaustively researched 
scientific paper in existence. Founded in 1988 by the United Nations and the World Meteorological Organization, the IPCC represents the distilled wisdom of over 600 climate researchers in 32 countries on changes in the Earth's atmosphere, ice and seas. It endeavors to answer the late New York mayor Ed Koch's famous question --How am I doing?‖ for all of us. The answer, which won't surprise anyone who has been following the climate change story, is not very well at all. It is now 95 percent likely that human spewed heat-trapping gases  --  rather than natural variability  --  are the main cause of climate change, according to today's report. In 2007 the IPCC's 
confidence level was 90 percent, and in 2001 it was 66 percent, and just over 50 
percent in 1995. What's more, things are getting worse more quickly than almost anyone thought would happen a few years back. 
1592. Richard Schiffman, (Atlantic Environ. writer), THE ATLANTIC, Sept. 27, 
2013 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/]
2013/09/leading-scientists-weigh-in-on-the-mother-of-all-climate-reports/280045/. 
There is also uncertainty about an apparent slowdown over the last decade in the rate of air temperature increase. While some critics claim that global warming has --stalled,‖ others point out that, when rising ocean temperatures are factored in, the 
Earth is actually gaining heat faster than previously anticipated. --Temperatures 
measured over the short term are just one parameter,‖ said Dr Tim Barnett of the Scripps Institute of Oceanography in an interview. --There are far more critical things going on; the acidification of the ocean is happening a lot faster than anybody thought that it would, it's sucking up more CO2, plankton, the basic food chain of the planet, are dying, it's such a hugely important signal. Why aren't people using that as a 
measure of what is going on?‖ 
1593. Richard Schiffman, (Atlantic Environ. writer), THE ATLANTIC, Sept. 27, 
2013 retrieved April 21, 2015 from http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/]
2013/09/leading-scientists-weigh-in-on-the-mother-of-all-climate-reports/280045/. 
Box, whose work has been instrumental in documenting the rapid deterioration of the Greenland ice sheet, also believes that the latest IPCC predictions (of a maximum just under three foot ocean rise by the end of the century) may turn out to be wildly optimistic, if the Greenland ice sheet breaks up. --We are heading into uncharted territory‖ he said. --We are creating a different climate than the Earth has ever seen.‖ The head of the IPCC, Rajendra Pachauri, speaks for the scientific consensus when he says that time is fast running out to avoid the catastrophic collapse of the natural systems on which human life depends. What he recently told a group of climate scientist could be the most chilling headline of all for the U.N. report: --We have five 
minutes before midnight.‖ 
1594. Nina Chestney, (Reuters reporter), ABC SCIENCE, Jan. 11, 2012 retrieved 
April 29, 2015 from http://www.abc.net.au/science/articles/2012/01/11/3405930.htm.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.abc.net.au/science/articles/2012/01/11/3405930.htm]High levels of carbon dioxide emissions in the atmosphere mean the next ice age is unlikely to begin for at least 1500 years, according to an article in the journal Nature Geoscience. Concentrations of the main gases blamed for global warming reached record levels in 2010 and will linger in the atmosphere for decades even if the world stopped pumping out emissions today, according to the UN's weather agency. An ice age is a period when there is a long-term reduction in the Earth's surface and 
atmospheric temperature, which leads to the growth of ice sheets and glaciers. During 
ice ages there are cycles of glaciation with ice sheets both advancing and retreating. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	12 5 
 
 
 
1595. Nina Chestney, (Reuters reporter), ABC SCIENCE, Jan. 11, 2012 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.abc.net.au/science/articles/2012/01/11/3405930.htm.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.abc.net.au/science/articles/2012/01/11/3405930.htm]--(Analysis) suggests that the end of the current interglacial (period) would occur within the next 1500 years, if atmospheric CO2 concentrations do not exceed (around) 240 parts per million by volume (ppmv),‖ the study's authors write. However, the current carbon dioxide concentration is of 390 ppmv, and at that level an increase in the volume of ice sheets would not be possible, they add. The causes of ice ages are not fully understood, but concentrations of methane and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, changes in the Earth's orbit around the Sun, and the movement of tectonic plates are all thought to contribute. The world is forecast to grow hotter as greenhouse gases continue to rise, increasing threats such as extreme weather events and sea level rise. Most scientists believe global temperature rise should be limited to within 2°C of the pre-industrial average to avoid the worst effects of climate change. 
1596. Rick Grow, (MDA Information Systems meteorologist), WASHINGTON 
POST, Dec. 31, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.washington post.com/blogs/capital-weather-gang/wp/2013/12/31/sudden-stratospheric-warming- could-it-lead-to-a-very-cold-january-in-d-c/. A phenomenon known as a sudden stratospheric warming (SSW) event just got underway, and this is sparking some conversation about how cold the pattern in the United States could get in January. 
Sustained Arctic outbreaks have occurred over the eastern half of the U.S. in the 
wake of several past SSW events; many times, D.C. has experienced extreme cold. The District - and the East at large - will be turning very cold late this week, though this will not be in response to abrupt changes in the stratosphere. 
1597. Suzanne Goldenberg, (Guardian US environment correspondent), 
GUARDIAN, March 30, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.the guardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/climate-change-food-supply-un. But it was the finding that climate change could threaten global food security that caught the attention of government officials from 115 countries who reviewed the report. --All 
aspects of food security are potentially affected by climate change,‖ the report said. 
The scientists said there was enough evidence to say for certain that climate change is affecting food production on land and sea. The rate of increase in crop yields is slowing - especially in wheat - raising doubts as to whether food production will keep up with the demand of a growing population. Changes in temperature and rainfall patterns could lead to food price rises of between 3% and 84% by 2050. --Climate change is acting as a brake. We need yields to grow to meet growing demand, but already climate change is slowing those yields,‖ said Michael Oppenheimer, a Princeton professor and an author of the report. Other food sources 
are also under threat. Fish catches in some areas of the tropics are projected to fall by 
between 40% and 60%, according to the report. 
1598. Suzanne Goldenberg, (Guardian US environment correspondent), 
GUARDIAN, March 30, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.the guardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/climate-change-food-supply-un. The report also connected climate change to rising food prices and political instability, for instance the riots in Asia and Africa after food price shocks in 2008. --The impacts are already evident in many places in the world. It is not something that is [only] going to happen in the future,‖ said David Lobell, a professor at Stanford University's centre for food security, who devised the models. --Almost everywhere you see the warming 
effects have a negative affect on wheat and there is a similar story for corn as well. 
These are not yet enormous effects but they show clearly that the trends are big enough to be important,‖ Lobell said. Wheat is the first big staple crop to be affected by climate change, because it is sensitive to heat and is grown around the world, from Pakistan to Russia to Canada. Projections suggest that wheat yields could drop 2% a decade. 
1599. Doug Moss, (The Environmental Magazine editor), SCIENTIFIC 
AMERICAN, Nov. 10, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.scientific american.com/article/does-global-warming-make-food-less-nutritious/. According to 
Myers, the findings -- published in June 2014 in the peer-reviewed journal Nature --  
are particularly troubling when one considers that some of the two to three billion people around the world who depend on wheat and rice for most of their iron and zinc already might not be getting enough of these essential nutrients. Zinc deficiency, which can exacerbate pneumonia, malaria and other health problems, is already linked to some 800,000 deaths each year among children under five. Meanwhile, iron deficiency is the primary cause of anemia, a condition that contributes to one in five maternal deaths worldwide. 
1600. Doug Moss, (The Environmental Magazine editor), SCIENTIFIC 
AMERICAN, Nov. 10, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.scientific 
american.com/article/does-global-warming-make-food-less-nutritious/. Myers and company aren't the only ones worried about global warming and nutrient losses. Another recent study by mathematical biologist Irakli Loladze analyzed data from thousands of --free-air CO2 enrichment experiments‖ on 130 different species of food plants and found that increased CO2 reduced overall mineral (nutrient) content across the board. --People don't need large quantities of the manganese or potassium they get from plants, but they do need some,‖ comments David Berreby on BigThink.com in response to Loladze's findings. --And for billions of people, plants are their only 
source.‖ 
1601. Doug Moss, (The Environmental Magazine editor), SCIENTIFIC 
AMERICAN, Nov. 10, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.scientific american.com/article/does-global-warming-make-food-less-nutritious/. Berreby is also bothered by another of Loladze's conclusions, that higher levels of CO2 also spur increases in starches and sugars in the same plants that lose mineral content. --In other words, with increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide, the valuable nutrients in these food crops are scarcer, and carbohydrates are more abundant -- in effect, the nutrients are ‗diluted',‖ he explains. This syncs with research out of the University of California at Davis, which estimates that the overall amount of protein we get from 
our food plants will drop some three percent in the coming decades given global 
warming's expected arc. 


1602. Scott Gottlied, (AEI resident fellow), WALL STREET JOURNAL, Sept. 16, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.wsj.com/articles/scott-gottlieb-and-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.wsj.com/articles/scott-gottlieb-and-]tevi-troy-ebolas-warning-for-an-unprepared-america-1410910044. The world is finally mobilizing to wage a muscular fight against Ebola's catastrophic spread through West Africa. President Obama has put the Pentagon in charge of a robust, 3,000-person U.S. relief effort in the stricken areas. This is a positive step, but the 
world is still dangerously ill-prepared for the fight against pandemic outbreaks. In the 
case of Ebola, we were late to the battle and are now focused too narrowly on places like Liberia while failing to see West Africa as one big outbreak. We also remain too dependent on outdated tools and strategies in fighting the virus, and are tethered to an effort not yet scaled to the challenge. While Ebola may still be contained, other potentially calamitous threats are out there. MERS, SARS, avian flu and other illnesses could re-emerge at any time. In the American Midwest, for instance, a novel virus classified as Enterovirus 68 has recently sent some 300 children to the hospital in respiratory distress, with no available antiviral therapy or vaccine. We need to 
rethink our preparedness and adopt a more modern approach for dealing with these 
and other looming outbreaks. 
1603. Scott Gottlied, (AEI resident fellow), WALL STREET JOURNAL, Sept. 16, 
2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.wsj.com/articles/scott-gottlieb-and-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.wsj.com/articles/scott-gottlieb-and-]tevi-troy-ebolas-warning-for-an-unprepared-america-1410910044. Ebola shows the danger of diseases developing and spreading around the world from a key convergence point. As Richard Preston wrote in his 1994 nonfiction best-seller --The Hot Zone,‖ when a novel virus emerges, the warning sign may be a series of small outbreaks at different times and places. These --microbreaks‖ can eventually re- 
emerge like Ebola has and become a pandemic. How many Ebola microbreaks were 
missed or not taken seriously? And how many other lethal pathogens -- from MERS to SARS to Enterovirus 68 -- are we too casual about today? The Department of Homeland Security's inspector general just issued a highly critical report finding that DHS lacks sufficient supplies and preparedness to handle a domestic pandemic. Thirteen years ago, soon after the 9/11 attacks, letters laced with anthrax killed five Americans. Just as 9/11 revealed the country's vulnerabilities to terror attacks, the anthrax episode exposed the need for better routine surveillance and strategic stockpiling of key countermeasures against viral outbreaks or bioterror attacks. We're still far less prepared than we should be, and far more vulnerable than we're 
admitting. 
1604. Melinda Moore, (MD/MPH), AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH, 
June 2012, retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/  [HYPERLINK: http://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/]
pdf/10.2105/AJPH.2011.300644. The United States is well poised to --think globally while acting locally‖ and --think locally while acting globally.‖ Both conceptual approaches will improve public health preparedness in this country and worldwide by explicitly tying US global health engagements to our own national health security --  thereby more fully harnessing the global dimensions of public health preparedness into US policy and action. 
1605. Melinda Moore, (MD/MPH), AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH, 
June 2012, retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/  [HYPERLINK: http://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/]
pdf/10.2105/AJPH.2011.300644. The size, diversity, and mobility of the US population and the number of foreign visitors each year mean that the United States is necessarily part of the --global health picture.‖ About 358 million travelers entered the United States in 2008, including 206 million entering via land ports of entry along the US-Mexico border. Americans face health threats, which can be of natural or deliberate origin, both at home and abroad. Pandemics and major natural disasters are high-visibility threats, but public health preparedness requires attention to the broader range of infectious and environmental threats that affect Americans every day, as well as the capabilities to effectively respond to and recover from a large-scale event. 
1606. John Arquilla, (US Naval Postgraduate defense analysis professor), FOREIGN 
POLICY, Jan. 28, 2013, retrieved April 13, 2015 from http://www.foreignpolicy. com/articles/2013/01/28/america_in_recline?page=0,1. The truth of the matter is that we cannot afford to continue the longstanding Powell doctrine that calls for the employment of --overwhelming force‖ in our interventions. Besides, massive numbers and huge firepower failed in Vietnam, and efforts to --overwhelm‖ had very mixed results in Iraq and Afghanistan. But the end of overwhelming force does not require withdrawal from the world. There is now the option of deploying smaller, more precision-oriented units, enabling the United States to remain actively engaged 
wherever its interests and/or moral impulses demand. There is no need to pull back, 
and there is a way to avoid the undue costs that come with just leaning forward in the usual way. This new way is the path of --leaning back.‖ President Obama is sometimes criticized for being too cool, but in the strategy business he knows enough to lean back. A commander-in-chief can never be too cool. 
1607. John Arquilla, (US Naval Postgraduate defense analysis professor), FOREIGN 
POLICY, Jan. 28, 2013, retrieved April 13, 2015 from http://www.foreignpolicy. com/articles/2013/01/28/america_in_recline?page=0,1. Leaning back, in essence, means bringing most of our large conventional forces home - maybe even demobilizing some of them, as Posen suggests. But we don't leave entirely; our 
weight just shifts when we lean. There will still be presence in many places around 
the world - perhaps even in more places, given that so much can be done these days by so few, thanks to the power of networking that links small combat teams with our incomparable air and naval strike assets, both manned and unmanned. And the units we do keep on the ground will work closely with local allies. This is true of the hundred special operations troops now in Uganda, who are helping to track down and destroy the Lord's Resistance Army. It will be the case in Afghanistan as well when the vast majority of our forces leave by the end of next year - if not sooner. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	12 6 
 
 
 
1608. Michael Mazarr, (U.S. National War College national security strategy professor), CSIS, Fall 2012, retrieved April 13, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/]publication/twq12FallMazarr.pdf. The first threat is budgetary. Debt is set to rise significantly over the next decade, in some scenarios approaching 100 percent of GDP shortly after 2020, along with interest payments by one estimate, rising from $146 billion in 2010 to over $800 billion in 2020. This has already raised fears of downgraded U.S. credit ratings and threats to the dollar as a reserve currency. The corresponding social austerity and financial pressures at all levels of government, as well as a public hostility to taxes, mean that spending cuts will bear the burden of deficit reduction. In recognition of this, several bipartisan budget proposals include major defense cuts. Groups pushing for serious deficit control have aimed for $800 billion to over $1 trillion in ten-year defense reductions, and even those may be just a down payment on a larger bill to follow. Further, the defense budget faces its own internal budget issues: for example, Tricare, the military's health program, costs the Department of Defense triple the amount of just a decade ago, and the annual costs of the military pension program may balloon from just over $52 billion in 2011 to as much as $117 billion by 2035. This is putting further pressure on those components of the defense budget essential to global strategy and power projection. 
1609. Michael Mazarr, (U.S. National War College national security strategy 
professor), CSIS, Fall 2012, retrieved April 13, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/]publication/twq12FallMazarr.pdf. A fourth threat to U.S. global strategy is that America's non-military tools of influence have proven incapable of achieving key 
U.S. goals in the areas nominated as the leading security challenges of the future 
transnational, substate threats, and the risks emanating from fragile states. While 
states have well-established theories for pursuing traditional political-military ends with diplomacy and force, the United States possesses no proven models for achieving progress in the social, psychological, and environmental costs of an integrating globe areas such as regional instability, terrorism, the complexities of development, radicalism, aggressive nationalism, organized crime, resource shortages, and ecological degradation. For half a century, the United States was a dominant global power which identified challenging core goals and tasks deterring military adventurism, building political-military alliances, erecting mutually- beneficial institutions of trade but to which Washington could apply established models and techniques. U.S. leadership and power becomes much more problematic in a world of complex problems which generate no broad agreement and which subject themselves to no clear solutions. 
1610. Christopher Fettweis, (Tulane political science professor), A DANGEROUS 
WORLD? THREAT PERCEPTION AND US NATIONAL SECURITY, 2013, pg 227. Precedent does not supply the only encouragement. Changing the dominant U.S. foreign policy belief system is perhaps not as daunting a challenge as it may at first seem, for a number of reasons. First, as already discussed, only a small number of opinions would have to be altered to have a significant effect. As nice as it is to imagine that the United States runs a democratic foreign policy, in reality not all opinions are equally important. Altering the beliefs of the masses may be quite difficult, but it is those of the elite that are decisive in foreign policy; affecting elites, if only because they are fewer in number, might not prove to be an insurmountable task. As influential as NSC 68 was, for instance, it was an internal document read only by senior government officials, and it remained classified until 1975. The various incarnations Of the Committee on Present Danger concentrated their efforts solely on the upper echelons of the foreign policy community, and they were quite successful in affecting foreign policy debate and practice. Success in minimizing pathological foreign policy behavior can occur long before majorities alter their beliefs. 
1611. Christopher Fettweis, (Tulane political science professor), A DANGEROUS 
WORLD? THREAT PERCEPTION AND US NATIONAL SECURITY, 2013, 227. Second, there is reason to believe that foreign policy beliefs are not as entrenched as some others. Many modern American politicians -- to say nothing of the people they lead -- know very little about foreign policy. The U.S. Congress is a wasteland of parochialism, where members can even be punished for appearing to know too much about the rest of the world.‖ Those at the top of the executive branch have been little better. The past three U.S. presidents had no background in foreign affairs before coming into office. Bill Clinton even managed to turn his opponent's foreign policy expertise into a liability in 1992, claiming that it demonstrated that the elder Bush did not pay adequate attention to domestic concerns. Eight years later, voters were unfazed about George W. Bush's disinterest in the outside world, as manifest in a record Of foreign travel stunningly low for a child of privilege, inability to name leaders of key countries, and devotion of only three pages in his campaign memoir to foreign affairs.‖ Although Barack Obama spent large portions of his life abroad, he had no direct foreign policy experience before 2008, and his 2012 Opponent had even less. so although 21st-century U S. presidents have some predetermined beliefs about foreign policy, their beliefs are probably more malleable than those of presidents who have come to office more seasoned in matters of state. Some of the most important, influential minds may not prove to be those most resistant to change. 
1612. Christopher Fettweis, (Tulane political science professor), A DANGEROUS 
WORLD? THREAT PERCEPTION AND US NATIONAL SECURITY, 2013, 227. Nearly immune, however, is not immune. Even the most deeply held beliefs find it difficult to survive sustained, long-term assaults of contradictory information. Psychologists who have studied evolution in beliefs report that despite occasional epiphanies that instantly change minds, like that of Saul on the road to Damascus, generally speaking the process is very gradual, and sometimes imperceptible.‖ Individuals often recognize that a change in their beliefs has occurred after the fact, and they resist admitting that their minds are evolving while the process is under way. There are examples of gradual, even generational evolution of beliefs that can give 
hope to those seeking to expunge fear and indispensability from U .S. foreign policy. 


1613. Christopher Fettweis, (Tulane political science professor), A DANGEROUS WORLD? THREAT PERCEPTION AND US NATIONAL SECURITY, 2013, 227. --Social Darwinism,‖ for instance, poisoned international politics for decades. The belief that humanity was split into a number Of distinct --races‖ in a perpetual existential struggle where Only the fittest survive shaped the worldview Of generations Of leaders. Social Darwinism helped justify any number Of pathological policies, from imperialism to the Holocaust, but over time, it collapsed under the weight Of rational counterargument and evidence. The identification Of DNA and the understanding of the genome allowed science to put social Darwinism and its cousins, eugenics and phrenology, to rest once and for all. Previously, internalized beliefs about the inevitability of competition between races were slowly changed by the onslaught of evidence and reason, and the understanding that differences among peoples were cultural rather than genetic. The edifice did not collapse all at once or with equal speed everywhere, but over time arguments based on the foundation of social Darwinism stopped winning popular debates on that --battlefield of beliefs,‖ and foreign policy behavior changed. Precedent, then, exists for evolution in fundamental beliefs, enough for one to hope that a similar process could eventually change popular perceptions toward modern, counterproductive irrationalities. 
1614. Barry Posen, (MIT political science professor), RESTRAINT: A NEW 
FOUNDATION FOR U.S. GRAND STRATEGY, 2014, 174. Nevertheless some potential causes of change are evident. There is a diffusion of power in the world. The gap between the United States and others will narrow; military capability is spreading; the cost of U.S. interventions is going up. Though seldom discussed, the people in the U.S. military are exhausted from more than a decade of constant warfare and increasingly dubious about the projects they are asked to undertake. The U.S. economy will take time to recover from the effects of the financial crisis that began in 2007 and to improve the fiscal condition of the U.S. government, both of which may limit the resources available for national security policy. 
1615. Damon Coletta, (USAF education professor), ISANET, July 2014 retrieved 
April 29, 2015 from http://web.isanet.org/Web/Conferences/FLACSO-ISA Buenos  [HYPERLINK: http://web.isanet.org/Web/Conferences/FLACSO-ISA]Aires 2014/Archive/f169e87a-9289-4fa4-bd44-b0e8353b014d.pdf. As Science relaxes the relationship between the state and higher Truth, it also sends a clear signal 
to other actors in the system that a leading state dedicated to scientific excellence is 
not tyrannical or lusting for power in order to enslave other communities. Science, unlike technology, helps distinguish hegemony from imperialism, turning an exploitive system of zero-sum competition into a society of states with at least some important goals in common and certain interactions aimed at mutual benefit rather than raw accumulation of power. The civilizing side-effects of science, its formative influence on political culture, governing institutions, and foreign perceptions -- apart from spurring advanced technologies -- create a reservoir of what Joseph Nye termed soft power. Scientific leadership attracts the admiration of other states, and in spite of 
an international environment rife with conflicts of interest, rival powers recognize 
certain problems such as freedom of navigation, ethnic or religious conflict, and environmental degradation as transnational, ones that cannot be managed without good will from the scientific state. With an admixture of admiration and indirect interest, then, other states approach the scientific hegemon holding a certain respect and predisposition toward long-term cooperation that is absent for great powers that try to coerce inferior governments as efficiently as possible. 
1616. Daron Acemoglu, (MIT economics professor), CHRISTIAN SCIENCE 
MONITOR, April 19, 2012, retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.csmonitor.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.csmonitor.com/]Commentary/Global-Viewpoint/2012/0419/World-s-next-technology-leader-will-be- 
US-not-China-if-America-can-shape-up. But what matters for global leadership is 
innovation, which is not only the key driver of per capita income growth but also ultimately the main determinant of military and diplomatic leadership. It was the US that proved after Pearl Harbor how a prosperous economy can rapidly increase its military power and preparedness when push comes to shove. So the right question to ask is not who will be the military leader of the next century, but who will be the technological leader. The answer must be: most probably the US - but only if it can clean up its act. 
1617. E. William Colglazier, (US secretary of state science and technology advisor), 
SCIENCE AND DIPLOMACY, July 8, 2014 retrieved May 1, 2015 from 
http://www.sciencediplomacy.org/perspective/2014/united-states-looks-global-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.sciencediplomacy.org/perspective/2014/united-states-looks-global-]
science-technology-and-innovation-horizon. The overwhelming U.S. dominance in scientific research in the last half of the twentieth century is being replaced by a more multipolar landscape2 of science, technology, and innovation, with the United States remaining a very strong force. The new data presented in the National Science Board's Science and Engineering Indicators 2014 confirms what we already know --  the United States is becoming less dominant in STI and there are substantial and increasing STI investments, linkages, and capacities now dispersed around the world. 
While the United States saw 4.9 percent growth from 2009 to 2011 in total research 
and development (R&D) expenditures, worldwide R&D spending increased over the same period by 15 percent. The U.S. share of worldwide R&D expenditures 
continued its decline; in 2000 it was 38 percent and in 2011 it stood at 30 percent. 
1618. Peter Foster, (Telegraph US editor), TELEGRAPH, June 7, 2013 retrieved 
April 29, 2015 from http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/barackobama/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/barackobama/]
10107125/NSA-surveillance-scandal-Barack-Obamas-credibility-under-scrutiny-like- 
never-before.html. But after Watergate and Iran Contra, after the dodgy Iraq War dossiers and the extraordinary rendition and CIA torture programs, and even the 
recent targeting of Conservative groups by the IRS, the US public could be forgiven 
for not wanting to take Big Brother's platitudes at face value. Just three months ago, Senator Ron Wyden, a Senate Intelligence Committee member who has campaigned against US government data-mining for years, asked James Clapper, the Director of National of National Intelligence a simple question: --Does the NSA collect any type of data at all on millions or hundreds of millions of Americans?‖ --No, sir‖, came Mr Clapper's reply - which, as we now know, was a flat-out lie. With ‗oversight' like that, Mr Obama's credibility is now under scrutiny like never before. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	12 7 
 
 
 
1619. Andranik Migranyan, (Institute for Democracy and Cooperation director), NATIONAL INTEREST, July 5, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://nationalinterest.org/commentary/scandals-harm-us-soft-power-8695. On [HYPERLINK: http://nationalinterest.org/commentary/scandals-harm-us-soft-power-8695] a practical geopolitical level, the spying scandals have seriously tarnished the reputation of the United States. They have circumscribed its ability to exert soft power; the same influence that made the U.S. model very attractive to the rest of the world. This former lustre is now diminished. The blatant everyday intrusions into the private lives of Americans, and violations of individual rights and liberties by runaway, unaccountable U.S. government agencies, have deprived the United States of its authority to dictate how others must live and what others must do. Washington can no longer lecture others when its very foundational institutions and values are 
being discredited -- or at a minimum, when all is not well --in the state of Denmark.‖ 
1620. Andranik Migranyan, (Institute for Democracy and Cooperation director), 
NATIONAL INTEREST, July 5, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://nationalinterest.org/commentary/scandals-harm-us-soft-power-8695. Judging  [HYPERLINK: http://nationalinterest.org/commentary/scandals-harm-us-soft-power-8695]by the latest exchange between Moscow and Washington, it appears that the executive branches of both countries will find adequate solutions to the Snowden situation without attacks on each other's dignity and self-esteem. Russia and the 
United States are both Security Council members, and much hinges on their 
decisions, including a slew of common problems that make cooperation necessary. Yet the recent series of scandals has caused irreparable damage to the image and soft power of the United States. I do not know how soon this damage can be repaired. But gone are the days when Orwell was seen as a relic of the Cold War, as the all- powerful Leviathan of the security services has run away from all accountability to state and society. Today the world is looking at America -- and its model for governance -- with a more critical eye. 
1621. Richard Wike, (Pew Research Center global attitudes research director), PEW 
RESEARCH CENTER, Sept. 18, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]
pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2013/09/18/nsa-revelations-strain-u-s-relations-with-a- 
friendly-brazil/. The Snowden affair could also potentially damage America's public image in a country where the U.S. and President Obama have been widely popular in recent years. In a spring 2013 Pew Research Center poll, 73% of Brazilians expressed a positive opinion of the U.S. Among the seven Latin American nations surveyed, only Salvadorans gave the U.S. a better rating (79% positive). President Obama - who spoke with Rousseff Monday night in an unsuccessful attempt to change her mind - also received high marks. Roughly seven-in-ten Brazilians (69%) said they 
have confidence in Obama to do the right thing in world affairs, by far his highest 
rating in the region. 
1622. Xenia Wickett, (Project Director, US; Dean, The Queen Elizabeth II Academy 
for Leadership in International Affairs), CHATHAM HOUSE, July 2, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from https://www.chathamhouse.org/media/comment/view/192839. Notwithstanding the rhetoric, all governments involved are trying hard to ensure that revelations about America's intelligence network do not have major implications for bilateral relations. But there could be at least one notable consequence. Perceptions of the US and international public support for the US - factors that, among others combine to make up America's soft power - have largely been falling since the highs 
of President Obama's election in 2008. While this was inevitable on some level as 
expectations were unrealistic, the spying revelations weaken America's moral position and undermine trust. A large part of America's power has come not from its military or economic strength, but from the perception that while America might do the wrong thing, it will do so for the right reasons. Revelations such as these weaken that belief. 
1623. Jim Arkedis, (Progressive Policy Institute senior fellow), THE ATLANTIC, 
June 19, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.theatlantic.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.theatlantic.com/]


1626. Adam Quinn, (Birmingham international politics senior lecturer), CHRISTIAN SCIENCE MONITOR, Oct. 29, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from 
http://www.csmonitor.com/Commentary/Opinion/2013/1029/NSA-revelations-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.csmonitor.com/Commentary/Opinion/2013/1029/NSA-revelations-]
threaten-Obama-s-soft-power-and-America-s-global-influence. Many of those who are optimistic about the ability of the US to pull off this project of declining power without declining influence place emphasis on two things: the extent to which the US 
has soft power due to widespread admiration for its political and cultural values, and 
the extent to which it has locked in influence through the extent of its existing networks of friends and allies. Even if these advantages cannot arrest America's decline on harder metrics, if played properly, they can mitigate its consequences and secure an acceptable future. Shoring up support from like-minded countries such as those of Europe ought to be the low-hanging fruit of such an effort. 
1627. Adam Quinn, (Birmingham international politics senior lecturer), CHRISTIAN 
SCIENCE MONITOR, Oct. 29, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from 
http://www.csmonitor.com/Commentary/Opinion/2013/1029/NSA-revelations-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.csmonitor.com/Commentary/Opinion/2013/1029/NSA-revelations-]
threaten-Obama-s-soft-power-and-America-s-global-influence. So the current 
problems do harm on both fronts. It will be difficult to maintain the allure of soft power if global opinion settles on the view that American political discord has rendered its democracy dysfunctional at home, or that its surveillance practices have given rein to the mores of a police state. And it will be harder to preserve American status through the force of its alliances if its politicians' economic irresponsibility (for example, publicly contemplating a default on American national debt) or scandals over surveillance or drone strikes alienate their public or cause their leaders to question the extent to which they really are on the same side as the US. Obama's day- 
to-day foreign policy struggles should not be simplistically taken as signs of 
collapsing American influence. But if the long-term plan is to carefully manage relative decline so as to preserve maximum influence, episodes such as those his country has faced since August do nothing to boost the prospects of success. 
1628. Grant Bowen, (Journal of High Technology Law contributor), JOURNAL OF 
HIGH TECHNOLOGY LAW, Feb. 10, 2014 retrieved May 1, 2015 from https://jhtlblog.wordpress.com/2014/02/10/the-long-term-effects-of-nsa-revelations/. Primarily, experts are concerned about the extent to which the US can successfully exert --soft power‖ through political and cultural values, while simultaneously lowering its military presence throughout the world. It was intended that through 
networks of friends and allies, the U.S. could extend this --soft power‖ and influence 
more countries through peace, rather than war-tactics. Maintaining and establishing more alliances through this method will help to mitigate consequences of lessening military might. However, the current surveillance problems do harm to this plan. In order to establish --soft power‖ in the first place, there has to be a baseline level of trust. The global opinion of America is hardly positive at the moment, though. Coming off a long government shutdown, and repeated surveillance scandals, American status has suffered. If the long-term plan is to carefully manage military decline, while preserving maximum influence, surveillance issues can't continue. 
They repeatedly break down the requisite trust in order to successfully follow such a 
plan. 
1629. Grant Bowen, (Journal of High Technology Law contributor), JOURNAL OF 
HIGH TECHNOLOGY LAW, Feb. 10, 2014 retrieved May 1, 2015 from https://jhtlblog.wordpress.com/2014/02/10/the-long-term-effects-of-nsa-revelations/. It may need to go without say that there is a question of whether the NSA security --surveillance‖ tactics raise issues of legality. According to Congress, and the Supreme Court the processes employed by the NSA do not violate the 4th amendment --as long as the government can show that it is relevant to an authorized 
investigation into known - and, significantly - unknown terrorists who may be in the 
United States.‖ Yet, legality, as determined by the government, does not answer the question of what the long-term effects of such surveillance will be. As we have seen 

international/archive/2013/06/prism-is-bad-for-american-soft-power/277015/. 	This 	already it could affect as much as international political relationships, or simply 

brings us back to Harry Truman and Jim Crow. Even though PRISM is technically 
legal, the lack of recent public debate and support for aggressive domestic collection is hurting America's soft power. The evidence is rolling in. The China Daily, an English-language mouthpiece for the Communist Party, is having a field day, pointing out America's hypocrisy as the Soviet Union did with Jim Crow. Chinese dissident artist Ai Wei Wei made the link explicitly, saying --In the Soviet Union before, in China today, and even in the U.S., officials always think what they do is necessary . . . but the lesson that people should learn from history is the need to limit 
state power.‖ [ellipsis in original] 
1624. Jim Arkedis, (Progressive Policy Institute senior fellow), THE ATLANTIC, 
June 19, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.theatlantic.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.theatlantic.com/]international/archive/2013/06/prism-is-bad-for-american-soft-power/277015/. Even America's allies are uneasy, at best. German Chancellor Angela Merkel grew up in the East German police state and expressed diplomatic --surprise‖ at the NSA's activities. She vowed to raise the issue with Obama at this week's G8 meetings. The Italian data protection commissioner said the program would --not be legal‖ in his country. British Foreign Minister William Hague came under fire in Parliament for his government's participation. If Americans supported these programs, our 
adversaries and allies would have no argument. As it is, the next time the United 
States asks others for help in tracking terrorists, it's more likely than not that they will question Washington's motives. 
1625. Adam Quinn, (Birmingham international politics senior lecturer), CHRISTIAN 
SCIENCE MONITOR, Oct. 29, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from 
http://www.csmonitor.com/Commentary/Opinion/2013/1029/NSA-revelations-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.csmonitor.com/Commentary/Opinion/2013/1029/NSA-revelations-]
threaten-Obama-s-soft-power-and-America-s-global-influence. The reason present friction between the US and its allies carries greater weight, however, is that it arises in the context of a global shift in power away from the US and its established allies and toward new powers. The prospect of --American decline‖ in terms of relative 
international power is the focus of a great deal of debate over both substance and 
semantics. But the central fact is that even the part of the US's own intelligence apparatus charged with long-term foresight regards it as established that, within 20 years, the world will have transitioned from the --unipolar‖ American dominance of the first post-cold war decades to a world in which multiple centers of power must coexist. The center of economic gravity has already shifted markedly toward Asia during the last decade. 
public and commercial computing access. 
1630. Steve Benen, (Rachel Maddow show producer), MSNBC, April 20, 2015 
retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.msnbc.com/rachel-maddow-show/the-race-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.msnbc.com/rachel-maddow-show/the-race-]21st-century-primacy. But there's a more meaningful takeaway from reports like these, published to coincide with the spring meetings of the International Monetary 
Fund and World Bank. The Times' piece notes that it was the United States that was 
largely responsible for building the global economic stage after World War II, it was the United States that's directed the stage for generations, but it's now the United States that's struggling to maintain its primacy. Washington's retreat is not so much by intent, Mr. Subramanian said, but a result of dysfunction and a lack of resources to project economic power the way it once did. Because of tight budgets and competing financial demands, the United States is less able to maintain its economic power, and because of political infighting, it has been unable to formally share it either. 
1631. John Mason, (former Wharton School faculty member), SEEKING ALPHA, 
April 18, 2015 retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://seekingalpha.com/article/3079616-  [HYPERLINK: http://seekingalpha.com/article/3079616-]
what-about-ebbing-u-s-economic-leadership. However, that day is over. Not only has 
the Chinese economy become as large as the United States economy, the Chinese have moved to make the renminbi a much stronger currency, a currency that is used much more frequently in international trade, and a currency that will, one day, become a reserve currency. Furthermore, there are the efforts in Europe to create a currency union that will, one day, also be aligned politically, so that the area will become a trading bloc comparable to the United States and China. Its currency, the Euro, already is used as a reserve currency by some central banks. The United States hegemony is coming to an end and this is going to require the United States to alter 
its focus, change some of its goals and objectives and modify some of its economic 
policies. Obviously, this change of mind and change of approach is not going to take place over night and there will be many --starts‖ and --stops‖ along the way. 
1632. Ashish Kumar Sen, (Atlantic Council staff writer), ATLANTIC COUNCIL, 
April 23, 2015 retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-]atlanticist/a-window-of-opportunity-for-tpp-ttip. Panelists at the discussion, moderated by Atlantic Council President and CEO Frederick Kempe, emphasized the link between trade and national security. --Trade and one's economic standing is so integral and interwoven with one's military standing,‖ said Dobriansky, an Atlantic 
Council board member. She added that bolstering economies will generate resources 
to invest in national security, and will also help build greater domestic consensus on foreign policy. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	12 8 
 
 
 
1633. Ashish Kumar Sen, (Atlantic Council staff writer), ATLANTIC COUNCIL, April 23, 2015 retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-]atlanticist/a-window-of-opportunity-for-tpp-ttip. Dobriansky acknowledged that there are --direct connections‖ between TTIP and strengthening NATO. --With regard to NATO, one of the mandates is we want to see greater burden sharing and toward that end, if you bolster economies you are going to have resources to be devoted in the national security area‖ that could strengthen ties within the alliance, she said. Retired Marine Corps Gen James L. Jones, Jr., Chairman of the Atlantic Council's Brent Scowcroft Center on International Security, called for a holistic approach to global challenges. The United States has an opportunity to work with its friends and allies to --adopt a spirit of conflict prevention,‖ said Jones, a former National Security Advisor to Obama. --If you get to that point, the investments that you make will be a lot 
cheaper and you will really strike a blow against radicalism.‖ 
1634. Barry Posen, (MIT political science professor), RESTRAINT: A NEW 
FOUNDATION FOR U.S. GRAND STRATEGY, 2014, 60-1. Partisans of Liberal Hegemony might accept some of the factual statements above but would argue that the good the strategy has achieved far outweighs the bad. As noted in the introduction, partisans assume that liberal democracy, human rights, market economies, free trade, nuclear nonproliferation, middle and great powers that do not take responsibility for their own security, and U.S. political and military hegemony are all mutually causative, and all lead ineluctably to a vast improvement in the security and welfare of others, and hence to the US. security position. They also posit that the world is fragile; damage to one of these good things will lead to damage to other good things, so the United States must defend all. The --fragile and interconnected‖ argument is politically effective. By accident or design, the argument derives an inherent plausibility due to the inevitable limits of our substantive knowledge, fear, uncertainty, liberal ideology, and U.S. national pride. Most targets of the argument do not know enough about the world to argue with experts who claim these connections; the chain of posited connections always leads to danger for the United States, and fear is a powerful selling tool. Once fear is involved, even low- probability chains of causation can be made to seem frightening enough to do something about, especially if you believe your country has overwhelming power. It is pleasant to believe that the spread of U.S. values such as liberty and democracy depend on U.S. power and leadership. The argument does not stand close scrutiny. 
1635. Barry Posen, (MIT political science professor), RESTRAINT: A NEW 
FOUNDATION FOR U.S. GRAND STRATEGY, 2014, 61. First, it obscures the inherently strong security position of the United States, which I have already reviewed. The economic, geographic, demographic, and technological facts supporting this point are seldom discussed, precisely because they are facts. It takes very large events abroad to significantly threaten the United States, and more moderate strategies can address these possibilities at lower costs. Typical Liberal Hegemony arguments for any new project take the form of domino theory. One small untended problem is expected easily and quickly to produce another and another until the small problems become big ones, or the collection of problems becomes overwhelming. Whether these connections are valid in any particular case will always be open to debate. Even if the connections are plausible, however, it is unlikely given the inherent U.S. security position that the United States need prop up the first domino. It has the luxury of waiting for information and choosing the dominos it wishes to shore up, if any. 
1636. Barry Posen, (MIT political science professor), RESTRAINT: A NEW 
FOUNDATION FOR U.S. GRAND STRATEGY, 2014, 61-2. Third, Liberal Hegemonists argue that U.S. commitments reduce the intensity of regional security competitions, limit the spread of nuclear weaponry, and lower the general odds of conflict, and that this helps keep the United States out of wars that would emerge in these unstable regions. This chain of interconnected benefits is not self-evident. United States activism does change the nature of regional competitions; it does not necessarily suppress them. For example, where U.S. commitments encourage --free- riding,‖ this attracts coercion, which the United States must then do more to deter. Where the United States encourages --reckless driving,‖ it produces regional instability. United States activism probably helps cause some nuclear proliferation, because some states will want nuclear weapons to deter an activist United States. When the United States makes extended deterrence commitments to discourage proliferation, the U.S. military is encouraged to adopt conventional and nuclear military strategies that are themselves destabilizing. Finally, as is clear from the evidence of the last twenty years, the United States ends up in regional wars in any case. 
1637. Barry Posen, (MIT political science professor), RESTRAINT: A NEW 
FOUNDATION FOR U.S. GRAND STRATEGY, 2014, 62-3. The transformation of hegemonic stability theory into a foreign policy doctrine is problematical. First, if there is a gain to having a global hegemon, we do not know its magnitude, and we do not know whether the gains to the United States are commensurate with the costs to the United States. I argue they are not. It is easy enough to imagine that the Great Depression could have been avoided had there been a leader in the 1931 banking crisis; it could also have been avoided, as we saw in 2007, had the central bankers of a handful of major states had a better understanding of economics and banking. Second, the theory tells us that the hegemon must have both the power and the will to sustain the system. How much power is an open question; I doubt that the United States actually has enough power to fulfill its appointed role in this system, especially its appointed economic role. For example, theorists argue that the hegemon must be both the lender and the market of last resort to perform its stabilizing role in crisis. The United States can no longer do either. Third the question of how much of the hegemon's power needs to be economic, and how much needs to be military is not a settled matter. This is particularly important given that the U.S. share of global GDP is destined to diminish; can the United States protect its hegemonic position by simply hyperinvesting in military power and deploying it around the world? Does the provision of military security provide a level of stability that inherently supports a global economic system, which would otherwise collapse? Is the existence of that global economy so central to U.S. economic power that if it did collapse, the United 
States would suffer disproportionately? 


1638. Barry Posen, (MIT political science professor), RESTRAINT: A NEW FOUNDATION FOR U.S. GRAND STRATEGY, 2014, 63-4. A security hegemon is, in any case, unnecessary to insure international trade. Liberal Hegemonists worry that if states feel insecure, their concern about relative gains from trade, and the effect of those relative gains on relative power, will drive out trade. But states have traded with one another under a variety of power constellations. Though political scientists -- especially hegemonic stability theorists -- and historians view Britain as the global hegemon in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, it was at best --first among equals‖ in a multipolar great power system, and its grand strategy looks much more like --offshore balancing' or Restraint than it does Liberal Hegemony. Britain was not the day-to-day global security provider. Rather it was the balancer of last resort. Peter Liberman notes that in this period, British-German trade climbed, despite the fact that each came to identify the other as their principal naval rival. Similarly, U.S.-Japan trade grew in the interwar period, even as U.S.-Japan relations deteriorated. States trade with one another due to mutual commercial interest; it seems to take quite a lot of fear and hostility to change the calculus. It is also likely, as Liberman suggests, that the existence of nuclear weapons has reduced whatever relative gains concerns there once might have been, insofar as great powers armed with nuclear weapons do not really depend on economic autonomy for their military power and hence their security. It is therefore improbable that a less militarily activist United States would lead to a collapse of international trade. 
1639. Barry Posen, (MIT political science professor), RESTRAINT: A NEW 
FOUNDATION FOR U.S. GRAND STRATEGY, 2014, 64. Some argue that a global military hegemon is necessary to secure peace and order in the global commons -- sea, air, space, and cyberspace --  to enable international trade and globalization. As a global naval power, Britain did bring a measure of peace and order to the global commons for most of the nineteenth century. But by the early twentieth century all great trading states had navies capable of securing their merchant ships against any predator who was not a great power. And the fact that other great powers might interfere with this trade did not prevent them from trading with one another, because such interference would have meant war. Mutual deterrence protected the global trade routes. In any event, as I will be argue in chapter 3, the military strategy of Restraint is committed to maintaining what I have called --command of the commons.‖ That is the bedrock military capability needed by the United States to influence geopolitical events abroad, should that prove necessary. Whatever side benefits for world trade that might arise from the capability to keep order in the commons would still be present. The U.S. interest in maintaining command of the commons is premised on its contribution to U.S. national security, not its contribution to global trade. 
1640. Nuno Monteiro, (Yale political science professor), INTERNATIONAL 
SECURITY, 2012, retrieved April 22, 2014 from Lexis. How well, then, does the argument that unipolar systems are peaceful account for the first two decades of unipolarity since the end of the Cold War? Table 1 presents a list of great powers divided into three periods: 1816 to 1945, multipolarity; 1946 to 1989, bipolarity; and since 1990, unipolarity. Table 2 presents summary data about the incidence of war during each of these periods. Unipolarity is the most conflict prone of all the systems, according to at least two important criteria: the percentage of years that great powers spend at war and the incidence of war involving great powers. In multipolarity, 18 percent of great power years were spent at war. In bipolarity, the ratio is 16 percent. In unipolarity, however, a remarkable 59 percent of great power years until now were spent at war. This is by far the highest percentage in all three systems. Furthermore, during periods of multipolarity and bipolarity, the probability that war involving a great power would break out in any given year was, respectively, 4.2 percent and 3.4 percent. Under unipolarity, it is 18.2 percent -- or more than four times higher. These figures provide no evidence that unipolarity is peaceful. 
1641. Matthew Kroenig, (Georgetown IR professor), MATTHEW KROENIG.com, 
February 2014, retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.matthew kroenig.com/The 
History of Proliferation Optimism_Feb2014.pdf. The spread of nuclear weapons 
poses a number of severe threats to international peace and security including: 
nuclear war, nuclear terrorism, global and regional instability, constrained freedom of action, weakened alliances, and further nuclear proliferation. Each of these threats has 
received extensive treatment elsewhere and this review is not intended to replicate or 
even necessarily to improve upon these previous efforts. Rather the goals of this 
section are more modest: to usefully bring together and recap the many reasons why 
we should be pessimistic about the likely consequences of nuclear proliferation. Many of these threats will be illuminated with a discussion of a case of much 
contemporary concern: Iran's advanced nuclear program. 
1642. Matthew Kroenig, (Georgetown IR professor), MATTHEW KROENIG.com, 
February 2014, retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.matthew kroenig.com/The History of Proliferation Optimism_Feb2014.pdf. The greatest threat posed by the 
spread of nuclear weapons is nuclear war. The more states in possession of nuclear 
weapons, the greater the probability that somewhere, someday, there will be a catastrophic nuclear war. To dale, nuclear weapons have only been used in warfare once. In 1945, the United Stales used nuclear weapons on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, bringing World War II to a close. Many analysts point to the sixty-five-plus-year tradition of nuclear non-use as evidence that nuclear weapons are unusable, but it would be naive to think that nuclear weapons will never be used again simply because they have not been used for some time. After all. analysts in the 1990s argued that worldwide economic downturns like the great depression were a thing of the past, only to be surprised by the dot-com bubble bursting later in the decade and 
the Great Recession of the late nineties. This author, for one, would be surprised if 
nuclear weapons are not used again sometime in his lifetime. 
1643. Matthew Kroenig, (Georgetown IR professor), MATTHEW KROENIG.com, 
February 2014, retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.matthew kroenig.com/The History of Proliferation Optimism_Feb2014.pdf. Before reaching a state of MAD. new nuclear states go through a transition period in which they lack a secure-second strike capability. In this context, one or both states might believe that it has an incentive to use nuclear weapons first. For example, if Iran acquires nuclear weapons, neither Iran, nor its nuclear-armed rival. Israel, will have a secure, second-strike 
capability. Even though it is believed to have a large arsenal, given its small size and 
lack of strategic depth. Israel might not be confident that it could absorb a nuclear strike and respond with a devastating counterstrike. Similarly, Iran might eventually be able to build a large and survivable nuclear arsenal, but. when it first crosses the nuclear threshold. Tehran will have a small and vulnerable nuclear force. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	12 9 
 
 
 
1644. Matthew Kroenig, (Georgetown IR professor), MATTHEW KROENIG.com, February 2014, retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.matthew kroenig.com/The History of Proliferation Optimism_Feb2014.pdf. In these pre-MAD situations, there are at least three ways that nuclear war could occur. First, the state with the nuclear advantage might believe it has a splendid first strike capability. In a crisis, Israel might, therefore, decide to launch a preventive nuclear strike to disarm Iran's nuclear capabilities. Indeed, this incentive might be further increased by Israel's aggressive strategic culture that emphasizes preemptive action. Second, the state with a small and vulnerable nuclear arsenal, in this case Iran, might feel use ‗em or loose ‗em pressures. That is, in a crisis, Iran might decide to strike first rather than risk having its entire nuclear arsenal destroyed. Third, as Thomas Schelling has argued, nuclear war could result due to the reciprocal fear of surprise attack. If there are advantages to striking first, one state might start a nuclear war in the belief that war is inevitable and that it would be better to go first than to go second. Fortunately, there is no historic evidence of this dynamic occurring in a nuclear context, but it is still possible. In an Israeli-Iranian crisis, for example, Israel and Iran might both prefer to avoid a nuclear war, but decide to strike first rather than suffer a devastating first attack from an opponent. 
1645. Flynt Leverett, (Penn State international affairs professor), PENN STATE 
JOURNAL OF LAW & INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, November 2012, retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://elibrary.law.psu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=  [HYPERLINK: http://elibrary.law.psu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article]1010&context=jlia. The chief reason U.S. foreign policy is failing is because, since the Cold War's end, the global transformation model has gained almost complete ascendancy in American political circles. Policy deliberations in both major parties 
are today dominated by its champions: by neoconservatives in the GOP and by liberal 
internationalists in the Democratic Party. That is problematic because transformationalists, whether on the right or the left, reject the leadership model's main premise. This premise reflects a lesson that balance of power theorists and foreign policy realists -- even those of the offensive realist variety (as John Mearsheimer refers to himself) -- all know: while hegemony seems nice in theory, in the real world it is unattainable; not even a state as powerful as the United States coming out of the Cold War can achieve it. Pursuing hegemony is not just quixotic; it is counter-productive for a great power's strategic position, dissipating resources 
(Kennedy's imperial overstretch phenomenon again) and sparking resistance from 
others. Pursuing hegemony ends up making you weaker. This is the critical factor that has undermined the effectiveness of American foreign policy over the last 20 years or so. 
1646. Flynt Leverett, (Penn State international affairs professor), PENN STATE 
JOURNAL OF LAW & INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, November 2012, retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://elibrary.law.psu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=  [HYPERLINK: http://elibrary.law.psu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article]1010&context=jlia. Now, less than twenty-five years after the Cold War's end, in a perfect illustration of how the pursuit of hegemony is self-defeating, the highly 
militarized political and security order that the United States strove so hard to create 
in the Middle East is disappearing. On the eve of 9/11, Washington seemed to have cultivated what U.S. policymakers like to call a strong --moderate‖ camp in the region. In America's diplomatic lexicon, moderates are so defined not because of their approach to domestic governance, but because they are receptive to strategic cooperation with the United States and at least theoretically open to peace with Israel. Barely more than a decade ago this camp included Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and the other Gulf Arab monarchies, North African regimes except Libya, and Turkey. On the other side were the --radicals‖ -- again defined as such not because of their internal governance, but by their posture toward the United States and Israel. Ten 
years ago, Iran had already emerged as the de facto leader of this camp, which 
included Syria and relatively weak non-state actors like Hizballah and HAMAS, along with Saddam Husayn's Iraq and Qadhafi's Libya. All of the other radicals were wary, to say the least, of Saddam's Iraq. Syria was generally considered, in American foreign policy circles, as a --swing‖ state in the balance between the two camps -- that it, as a state which, with a peace agreement whereby Israel returned the Golan Heights to Syrian control, could potentially be persuaded to cut back its ties to Hizballah, HAMAS, and Iran and shift decisively into the --moderate‖ camp, thereby tipping the regional balance even more squarely against more radical or revisionist 
actors. Libya, it turned out, was already in discussions with Washington about 
terrorism and weapons of mass destruction that would bring it out of the radical camp and put it at least on the margins of the moderate camp. 
1647. Flynt Leverett, (Penn State international affairs professor), PENN STATE 
JOURNAL OF LAW & INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, November 2012, retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://elibrary.law.psu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=  [HYPERLINK: http://elibrary.law.psu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article]1010&context=jlia. This decline in America's regional position was largely self- inflicted. American primacy in the Middle East has always rested on two things: capacity and legitimacy. In a powerful demonstration of hegemonic ambition's 
inherent dysfunctionality, the United States has, in the post-Cold War period, 
exceeded the limits of its capacity in the region while simultaneously undermining its legitimacy there. With regard to capacity, America remains uniquely capable of projecting conventional military power into the Middle East, especially the Persian Gulf. No one else comes close to it in this regard; no one else, China included, will come close for years -- indeed, decades -- to come. But strategically failed occupations in Iraq and Afghanistan have underscored the limits of what the U.S. military can accomplish. And military power is becoming less relevant to the challenges Washington faces in the region. 


1648. Flynt Leverett, (Penn State international affairs professor), PENN STATE JOURNAL OF LAW & INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, November 2012, retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://elibrary.law.psu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=  [HYPERLINK: http://elibrary.law.psu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article]1010&context=jlia. As to legitimacy, Washington has tried under successive administrations to gain Arab states' buy-in to a U.S.-led, highly militarized political and security order in the Middle East on the grounds that this would bring good 
things to the region, including greater security and a resolution to the Arab-Israeli 
dispute. But, frankly put, America has not delivered. Wars in Afghanistan and Iraq have cost it dearly, not just in blood and treasure, but in the perceived legitimacy of its purposes in the region. Every methodologically serious poll shows this. Likewise, it has become clear that America is not going to deliver on the Arab-Israeli conflict. Paradoxically, this is itself a kind of hegemonic assertion. American policy on Arab- Israeli issues is hardly grounded in balance of power politics -- whereby aggressive pursuit of an Arab-Israeli settlement would be strongly warranted. Rather, the United States is playing the politics of hegemony, insisting that Palestinians and Arab states 
make peace with Israel on terms that are not just politically comfortable for Israel but 
that amount to the Arab states' permanent subordination. While we do not underestimate the Israel lobby, it is not the source of this problem. The lobby is effective because it is pushing on a door already opened by America's own hegemonic ambitions. Absent real peacemaking, Washington is seen as enabling an Israeli national security doctrine that, under the misleading label of deterrence, seeks a kind of regional hegemony for Israel, through open-ended occupation and freedom to use military force first, unilaterally, and disproportionately, for whatever purpose Israeli leaders deem desirable. That, too, has cost the United States in terms of the 
perceived legitimacy of its purposes in the Middle East. 
1649. David Shlapak, (RAND corporation senior international policy analyst), 
SURVIVAL, March 20, 2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from Taylor and Francis. The prospect of defeat should deter US war-fighting concepts should exploit this advantage by eschewing, where possible, complex and dangerous offensive operations in favor of more defensively oriented postures. Defeating Chinese power projection need not involve large-scale attacks against targets on the mainland, as envisioned in the Air-Sea Battle concept enjoying currency within the Pentagon. Instead, attack submarines, land-based anti-ship missiles (ASMs), fast, stealthy, missile-armed patrol boats, and long-range, air-launched ASMs could be used to create lethal maritime ‗kill boxes' for Chinese warships and, if desired, Chinese commerce. Mobile surface-to-air defenses and fighters shifting among small, dispersed bases would contest People's Liberation Army air operations. Absent dramatic improvements in the effectiveness of antimissile defenses, it will be difficult to prevent China's large inventory of ballistic missiles from inflicting considerable damage on a wide range of targets. However, single-use missiles are a very expensive way to deliver high explosives, and even China's magazine is of finite size. To the extent that China cannot achieve its objectives via punitive strikes alone, a concept based on dispersed defense offers a good probability of defeating an attack; the prospect of such a defeat should serve to deter one. 
1650. David Shlapak, (RAND corporation senior international policy analyst), 
SURVIVAL, March 20, 2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from Taylor and Francis. The strategy America needs is one that is shaped by the country's legitimate security challenges, not internal Pentagon politics. It recognises that defense spending is a burden on the nation, and that the nation feels itself at this moment overburdened. US strategy should focus on five primary problems - the absolute need to deter a nuclear attack on the homeland and a core of four optional scenarios - rather than attempting to support a hollow doctrine of American exceptionalism or sustain self-proclaimed leadership that has brought benefits neither to the world nor to ordinary Americans. It is a more modest strategy serving a more modest country with more modest, reasonable and realistic ambitions. The United States needs a strategy that addresses the world it faces as that world actually is, not one driven by shibboleths that are obsolete, if indeed they ever held true. Clinging onto those illusions, far from ensuring American security, will endanger it. 
1651. Michael Mazarr, (US War College national security strategy professor), 
FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, May 2013, retrieved April 22, 2015 from https://www.fpri.org/docs/Discriminate_Power_Mazarr_et_al.pdf. This [HYPERLINK: http://www.fpri.org/docs/Discriminate_Power_Mazarr_et_al.pdf] era of empowerment and competition is not likely to tip over into intentional aggression or a regular pattern of great power warfare. Certain norms -- such as the prohibition on unprovoked aggression -- have become fairly well established. Leading, modern states crave prosperity above all. The value of conquest has declined, and the ability of smaller powers to impose a steep price for aggression has grown. Nuclear weapons deter thoughts of intentional conquest. 
1652. Michael Mazarr, (US War College national security strategy professor), 
FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, May 2013, retrieved April 22, 2015 from https://www.fpri.org/docs/Discriminate_Power_Mazarr_et_al.pdf. The [HYPERLINK: http://www.fpri.org/docs/Discriminate_Power_Mazarr_et_al.pdf] trend toward a more multipolar world does have a number of other implications. The risk of regional conflict may indeed become more pronounced -- but less from revisionist state aggression than from accidental escalation and misperception growing out of generalized competition and internal political or economic turmoil. Current territorial disputes in Southeast Asia, North Korean belligerence, the India-Pakistan conflict, and the contest over Iran's nuclear program are leading examples of this risk. In a world of more widely shared influence, moreover, any sustainable strategy for global security must be devoted to bringing key rising powers into the management of the international system in more profound ways. Only by working to create a more shared sense of action can the burdens of global norms be spread. Yet we face a clear dilemma: The potential for productive partnerships may be more limited than we hope. There is no easy way to resolve this dilemma -- only energetic, patient diplomacy combined with a willingness to take risk to empower and call forth effort from others. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	13 0 
 
 
 
1653. Barry Posen, (MIT political science professor), FOREIGN AFFAIRS, January/February 2013, retrieved April 22, 2014 from Ebsco. Shifting to a more restrained global stance would yield meaningful benefits for the United States, saving lives and resources and preventing pushback, provided Washington makes deliberate and prudent moves now to prepare its allies to take on the responsibility for their own defense. Scaling down the U.S. military's presence over a decade would give partners plenty of time to fortify their own militaries and develop the political and diplomatic machinery to look after their own affairs. Gradual disengagement would also reduce the chances of creating security vacuums, which opportunistic regional powers might try to fill. U.S. allies, of course, will do everything they can to persuade Washington to keep its current policies in place. Some will promise improvements to their military forces that they will then abandon when it is convenient. Some will claim there is nothing more they can contribute, that their domestic political and economic constraints matter more than America's. Others will try to divert the discussion to shared values and principles. Still others will hint that they will bandwagon with strong neighbors rather than balance against them. A few may even threaten to turn belligerent. 
1654. Flynt Leverett, (Penn State international affairs professor), PENN STATE 
JOURNAL OF LAW & INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, November 2012, retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://elibrary.law.psu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=  [HYPERLINK: http://elibrary.law.psu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article]1010&context=jlia. A leading Chinese academic expert on the Middle East recently remarked to us that the only force which can weaken the United States internationally is the United States itself. We agree. Over the next decade -- perhaps even within the 
next year -- Washington will make decisions that will largely determine whether 
America plays a positive role in shaping the transition to a more genuinely multipolar world, based on realistic management of the distribution of power in key regional and global arenas and effective provision of important public goods for a still globalizing world, or whether it is ultimately the biggest loser in this transition. The choice is up to Americans and their leaders. 
1655. Riccardo Alcaro, (Brookings nonresident fellow), BROOKINGS, April 10, 
2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/order-from-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/order-from-]chaos/posts/2015/04/10-west-liberal-order-multipolarity-alcaro. In light of this, multipolarity has been sometimes compared to an incurable disease that will eventually kill the liberal order. But there is insufficient evidence to take this as a foregone conclusion. Two factors should urge caution. First, in spite of the severe deterioration in Western-Russian relations following the Ukraine crisis, international security is still characterized more by functional threats such as jihadism, nuclear proliferation, and regional crises, than it is by great power conflict. Functional threats are evidently insufficient to create a permanent bond of friendship between otherwise competing countries. Yet, such threats engender a powerful logic of pragmatic cooperation even among such countries. The case of Iran's nuclear program, on which the West and China and Russia have successfully cooperated in the P5+1 framework, is a good case in point. 
1656. Riccardo Alcaro, (Brookings nonresident fellow), BROOKINGS, April 10, 
2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/order-from-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/order-from-]chaos/posts/2015/04/10-west-liberal-order-multipolarity-alcaro. The second factor 
concerns the structural limits of the multipolar challenge to the liberal order. Russia 
and China are both interested in maximizing their influence in their neighborhoods and, since U.S. power is the main factor inhibiting their ambitions, they strive to see it reined in. Yet, China and Russia also benefit from the effects of the U.S. action as guarantor of international security. In addition, they have not yet presented alternatives to the U.S.-based liberal order. China might one day reach such levels of development and resource accumulation that Beijing might eventually cast the die and make its bid for world domination. But evidence of this possible trajectory is so far lacking. Neither China nor Russia possess the economic and military strength of 
the United States. More critically, they both lack its large system of alliances and 
partnerships. Neither is able, nor willing, to make a bid to replace the United States as the ultimate guarantor of world security. 
1657. Riccardo Alcaro, (Brookings nonresident fellow), BROOKINGS, April 10, 
2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/order-from-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/order-from-]chaos/posts/2015/04/10-west-liberal-order-multipolarity-alcaro. In the second scenario, the United States predicates its foreign policy on the imperative to avoid great power conflict. The idea of global security governance prevails, defined by a constant balancing act between containing tensions and increasing selective cooperation between great powers. Because multipolar relations are not adversarial, the EU can use its collective economic power with greater leeway, either as an instrument to coerce with sanctions or as an instrument of persuasion via rewards. In Europe, the EU's role is complementary rather than ancillary to NATO, with the latter focused on deterrence and defense (rather than containment) and the former freer to modulate between pressure and engagement. So long as confrontation with Russia is carried out outside a full containment policy, diverging European views on the matter are easier to handle. In the Asia-Pacific, Europe's role remains marginal, but EU-China diplomatic exchanges and trade are less threatening to U.S. policies. 
1658. Riccardo Alcaro, (Brookings nonresident fellow), BROOKINGS, April 10, 
2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/order-from-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/order-from-]chaos/posts/2015/04/10-west-liberal-order-multipolarity-alcaro. Multipolarity may have injected a degree of unpredictability into the international system, but there is no reason to assume that it will lead to the liberal order's collapse. Much will depend on how the United States decides to adjust. Whether it opts for containment and 
confrontation or pragmatic engagement of non-Western powers, Europe will follow. 
Its contribution, however, will be more modest in the former than in the latter case. Multipolarity may indeed be a disease of the liberal order. But if that order eventually dies, the cure, not the disease, will carry the blame. 
1659. Barry Posen, (MIT political science professor), RESTRAINT: A NEW 
FOUNDATION FOR U.S. GRAND STRATEGY, 2014, 65. Liberal Hegemony is a costly, wasteful, and self-defeating grand strategy. The strong inherent security position of the United States makes it unnecessary. The United States has spent vast sums to sustain omnidirectional military superiority. The United States has endeavored to reassure wealthy and prosperous allies and to deter former, and potential future adversaries. It has waged War to reorganize the internal politics of other states, usually weak ones that constituted little threat to the United States or its interests. Liberal Hegemony is not making the United States more secure. The huge 
global military and the frequent resort to force produce several unfortunate outcomes. 


1660. Barry Posen, (MIT political science professor), RESTRAINT: A NEW FOUNDATION FOR U.S. GRAND STRATEGY, 2014, 65-6. First, the United States is causing countervailing behavior. The United States has stimulated actions great and small from the world's middle powers, which increase U.S. Costs, or aim to erode U.S. advantages. Most of this activity has not quite risen to the level of true --balancing,‖ but rather constitutes a kind of erratic but sustained obstructionism. China, however, is developing the underlying economic power to permit true balancing and is building up its military capability. It is the nature of a competitive anarchical system that what one side does to defend itself often has offensive potential versus others. So it is hard to tell how much Chinese military activity is balancing, and how much is the common phenomenon of a rising power developing sharper elbows. At the same time, Russia which is not a rising power, and which has reason to fear China, nevertheless often makes common cause with it. This looks more like old-fashioned balancing. So-called --rogue‖ states also do what they can to build their capability -- some is for mischief but some is a search for a deterrent against future U.S. intervention. As other States grow in capacity relative to the United States, which seems to be in the cards, there will likely be more balancing if the United States remains so energetic As others build their capabilities, the Liberal Hegemony project Will become even more costly. 
1661. Barry Posen, (MIT political science professor), RESTRAINT: A NEW 
FOUNDATION FOR U.S. GRAND STRATEGY, 2014, 66. Second, the common response by U.S. allies to the U.S. has been to --cheap ride‖ or --reckless drive.‖ Most allies have cut their defense efforts since the end of the Cold War. This is understandable in Europe, where the direct threat from Russia is difficult to discern. Nevertheless, the continuing U.S. commitment to NATO makes this an easy choice for the Europeans. Japan is the more striking free rider. Its low defense spending is noteworthy given the oft expressed concerns of Japanese policymakers about the rise of China. Jawboning by the United States of its allies -- asking for higher defense spending and more efficient defense efforts -- has for the most part failed to elicit much cooperation. Advocates of Liberal Hegemony may argue that this makes the case for continuing the strategy. The liberal democratic allies of the United States are somehow unwilling to look after themselves, so the United States must, in its own interest. This ignores the fact that they make their defense decisions in the face of extravagant United States promises to defend them. They will not do more unless the United States credibly commits to doing less. And in the case of Europe, we must acknowledge that they may simply have gauged the security situation on their continent better than has the United States. Be that as it may, under-defended allies mean more work for the United States. 
1662. Barry Posen, (MIT political science professor), RESTRAINT: A NEW 
FOUNDATION FOR U.S. GRAND STRATEGY, 2014, 66-7. Reckless driving by U.S. allies is also a significant problem. Secure in the knowledge that the United States will serve as the military lender of last resort, they invest in policies that redound to the political disadvantage of the United States, which can ultimately precipitate real military costs. Israel is the easiest example; its policies in the occupied territories contribute to the negative image of the United States in the Arab world, complicating both the struggle with Al-Qaeda and now the effort to contain Iran. Many would argue that Israeli policies are not even good for Israel. United States military backing makes the costs of this policy low for Israel. Indeed the U.S. security subsidy probably demobilizes potential domestic opposition in Israel, because the financial costs are not fully realized by Israelis. It is not easy to translate these political costs into explicit security costs for the United States. We only have the testimony of U.S. diplomats and soldiers that these Israeli policies complicate efforts to cooperate with Arab states. 
1663. Barry Posen, (MIT political science professor), RESTRAINT: A NEW 
FOUNDATION FOR U.S. GRAND STRATEGY, 2014, 67. Another kind of reckless driving emerges among the domestic partners found by the United States in its counterinsurgency and state-building efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan. The U.S. relationship with the Maliki government and the Karzai government reveals a long- understood tension in counterinsurgency conducted by outside powers, waged on behalf Of internal political factions. Counterinsurgency depends for its success on a combination of tactical "best practices‖ and political solutions. But the regimes backed by the United States mainly have an interest in perpetuating their hold on power. Moreover, these dependencies are slower to reform their own militaries, because the United States is there to take up the slack. If the United States is fighting their enemies, then they can focus on their internal friends. If negotiations with insurgents are launched, they have an equal interest in securing the most favorable deal for themselves. The politics of the arrangement works against internal reforms that would win --hearts and minds,‖ and against negotiated solutions. This puts a heavier burden on the outside military effort, which in these cases means the United States. It also ultimately renders the military effort somewhat futile. 
1664. Barry Posen, (MIT political science professor), RESTRAINT: A NEW 
FOUNDATION FOR U.S. GRAND STRATEGY, 2014, 67-8. Third, Liberal Hegemony is insufficiently sensitive to identity politics. Nation, ethnicity, and religion remain strong forces in the world today, especially in areas experiencing rapid social and economic change Identity politics has posed three large problems for the strategy of Liberal Hegemony. First, in some parts of the world there is simply great opposition to the very presence Of the United States. This is particularly true in the Arab world. Second, a good deal of internal violence is associated with identity politics, which complicates the U.S. effort to install liberal institutions as part of a peace-making, nation- and state-building strategy. Power sharing is more easily mobilized in principle than in practice. Bosnia-Herzegovina and Iraq testify to the difficulty of installing a working --consociational democracy‖ as a solution to civil wars embedded in identity politics. Finally, the U .S. experience in Iraq and now Afghanistan demonstrates that small numbers of motivated militants with roots in local society can mount very effective violent resistance movements on thin resource bases. While many members of these societies, perhaps most, would rather sit out a violent insurgency, the local fighters nevertheless have a home court advantage. That the United States managed to suppress the Iraqi insurgencies, build a semicompetent Iraqi security force, and install a ramshackle system of governance should not blind us to the mediocrity of the outcome and the high costs in blood and treasure it took to get there. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	13 1 
 
 
 
1665. David Shlapak, (RAND corporation senior international policy analyst), SURVIVAL, March 20, 2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from Taylor and Francis. The 2012 defense guidance, for example, warns of ‗violent extremists' with ‗the potential to pose catastrophic threats that could directly affect our security and prosperity'. The catastrophic dangers are not specified; it is simply assumed that the reader will accept their existence. Threats to the so-called ‗global commons' - the maritime, electronic and orbital lines of communication through which the world's trade and finances flow - are also cited as major dangers, although again, who is endangering them, to what extent and to what ends is not publicly explained. Current planning should not necessarily be the baseline for future strategy. There is an implicit but foundational assumption behind much of the discussion about the DoD's future: that the status quo is the standard against which all changes should be measured and, for the most part, resisted. This thinking is akin to looking outside during a thunderstorm and concluding that everyone should always keep their umbrellas open. 
1666. David Shlapak, (RAND corporation senior international policy analyst), 
SURVIVAL, March 20, 2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from Taylor and Francis. Some of these conflicts were virtuous attempts to undo unprovoked aggression or rescue threatened populations, and the intangible results in terms of stability and humanitarianism may have made them worthwhile. But that does nothing to alter the fact that of these wars, from Korea through Iraq, only one - the first phase of the Afghan conflict - was waged in response to a direct threat to the safety and security of the American people. The others were optional. One of the responsibilities of strategy is to place limits on ambition, which means above all seeking to distinguish the things that one cannot tolerate from those one would prefer not to happen. Happily free by virtue of geography from the danger of invasion, the sole national- security absolute for the United States is the requirement to prevent, with the highest possible degree of confidence, a nuclear attack on the homeland by a well-armed state adversary. No other contingency, including a nuclear attack with a single terrorist weapon or one or two crude intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), presents a truly existential threat. Maintaining a robust deterrent against this catastrophe - absent reductions in global nuclear arsenals sufficient to make the danger disappear - is and must remain the primary mission of US armed forces. 
1667. David Shlapak, (RAND corporation senior international policy analyst), 
SURVIVAL, March 20, 2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from Taylor and Francis. Sadly, the residuum of US dominance may go beyond the absence of a positive inheritance - it may, in fact, be negative. America used its power to intervene in sometimes capricious ways, promulgated a doctrine of preventive and pre-emptive warfare, and warned the world at large that ‗either you are with us or you are with the terrorists'. America's ‗war on terror' was in many quarters interpreted as a war on Islam, and the botched campaign in Afghanistan, among other consequences, has contributed to destabilizing nuclear-armed Pakistan. The 2003 invasion of Iraq overthrew a reprehensible dictator but left behind a country in violent disarray, and created an opportunity for Iran to expand its regional influence. Afghanistan will not emerge from a decade-plus of US-led war as a secular democracy. American power could not keep down the price of oil, nudge Israel and Palestine towards a legitimate peace process (let alone a lasting peace) or halt genocides in Rwanda, Sudan and elsewhere. It did not stop North Korea from building a nuclear weapon, nor does it seem to be dissuading Iran from at minimum developing the capability to pursue one. While the world may not be worse off for America's exercise of its enormous power over the past 20-odd years, it is not at all clear that it is better off. 
1668. David Shlapak, (RAND corporation senior international policy analyst), 
SURVIVAL, March 20, 2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from Taylor and Francis. Nor has America's military pre-eminence paid dividends at home. Including future costs for veterans' medical care and disability payments, a Harvard study concluded that the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq will wind up costing the US between $4 and $6 trillion. Over 6,700 American service members have lost their lives in the two wars, with another 51,000 wounded in action. Disputes over the appropriate uses of US military muscle have contributed to the polarization of American political life. There is also little evidence that the roughly $12trn the United States has spent on its military since the end of the Cold War has propelled the economy forward. During that span, the years when defense spending as a percentage of GDP was at its lowest were those that experienced the greatest economic growth. Some analyses have concluded that the ‗multiplier effect' of defense spending - the total impact on the economy of every dollar expended on the military - is actually less than one (meaning GDP increases by less than a dollar for every one the Pentagon spends), and far lower than that of other forms of government spending. Meanwhile, the United States in 2012-13 had a larger defense budget than the next eight biggest military spenders combined. While it can certainly be argued that no other nation has global responsibilities like America's, that gap is still remarkable. 
1669. David Shlapak, (RAND corporation senior international policy analyst), 
SURVIVAL, March 20, 2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from Taylor and Francis. The world is indeed complicated and messy, but this does not mean that it demands American global leadership. The world has always been complicated and messy; the human tendency to see our own time as uniquely problematic inevitably distorts our perspective. Even were the contemporary scene uniquely complex, it would not put a premium on US power. Furthermore, it is not clear that America's supremacy has begotten a world that is safer, more stable, or more affluent. There is no coherent first-principles argument that a world led by a militarily dominant United States is inherently more peaceful or prosperous than some possible alternative. 


1670. David Shlapak, (RAND corporation senior international policy analyst), SURVIVAL, March 20, 2015 retrieved April 22, 2015 from Taylor and Francis. There is also a frequently overlooked difference between being the world's greatest military power and being its leader. China, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Russia, Egypt and Iran - seven countries who together account for nearly half of the planet's population - almost certainly do not see themselves as being led in any meaningful way by the United States. While the US does have great influence in the world, this flows less from its military prowess - employment of which has been frustrated at least as often as it has been successful - than from the strength of its economy, the creativity of its people and the example it provides of an enduring, pluralistic democracy. Each of these is threatened by an overbearing and excessively militarized approach to the world. There can likewise be little doubt that the United States' recent security policy has undermined the nation's claim to moral leadership. Abu Ghraib, ‗extraordinary rendition', the wildly unpopular invasion of Iraq, the use of torture in the ‗war on terror', the noxious surveillance state revealed by recent leaks and the controversy surrounding Washington's lethal use of drones will long haunt America's reputation. 
1671. Benjamin Friedman, (MIT political science PhD candidate), ORBIS, 2012, 
retrieved April 22, 2014 from Science Direct. Washington's defense analysts typically take those observations as sufficient to establish the necessity that U.S. forces remain in Asia to balance Chinese military power. But to justify a U.S. military presence there, one also needs to show both that Asian nations cannot or will not balance Chinese power themselves and that their failure to do so would greatly harm U.S. security. Neither is likely. Geography and economics suggest that the states of the region will successfully balance Chinese power -- even if we assume that China's economic growth allows it to continue to increase military spending. Bodies of water are natural defenses against offensive military operations. They allow weaker states to achieve security at relatively low cost by investing in naval forces and coastal defenses. That defensive advantage makes balances of power more stable. Not only are several of China's Asian rivals islands, but those states have the wealth to make Chinese landings on their coast prohibitively expensive. India's mountainous northern border creates similar dynamics. 
1672. Benjamin Friedman, (MIT political science PhD candidate), ORBIS, 2012, 
retrieved April 22, 2014 from Science Direct. The argument that U.S. alliances are necessary for stability and global commerce is only slightly more credible. One problem with this claim is that U.S. security guarantees can create moral hazard --  emboldening weak allies to take risks they would otherwise avoid in their dealings with neighbors. Alliances can then discourage accommodation among neighboring states, heightening instability and threatening to pull the United States into wars facilitated by its benevolence. Another point against this argument is that even if regional balancing did lead to war, it would not obviously be more costly to the U.S. 
economy than the cost of the alliance said to prevent it. Neutrality historically pays. 
1673. Quddus Snyder, (Maryland PhD research scholar), CIDCM, 2012, retrieved 
April 13, 2014 from http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/workshop/papers/the_bipolarity_  [HYPERLINK: http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/workshop/papers/the_bipolarity_]
of_a_unipolar_system.pdf. Under these circumstances, secondary powers are likely to 
adopt a strategy of accommodation. Robert Kelly describes this as a kind of --bail in‖ behavior where secondary powers come to the aid of a struggling hegemon that they 
see as legitimate. The US will remain far stronger, at least militarily if not also 
economically, than most of the secondary powers for a long time to come. While it 
might not be able to do as much as it used to, the US will still be able to accomplish 
more than most. In effect, secondary powers are likely to reason that a weakened hegemon is still much better than no hegemon. 
1674. Quddus Snyder, (Maryland PhD research scholar), CIDCM, 2012, retrieved 
April 13, 2014 from http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/workshop/papers/the_bipolarity_  [HYPERLINK: http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/workshop/papers/the_bipolarity_]of_a_unipolar_system.pdf. The US will find that secondary powers are willing to accommodate and compromise in ways that were perhaps unlikely under unipolarity. The main concern will not be the unilateral exercise of American power. Rather, secondary powers will worry about America's level of commitment to them moving forward. America will no longer be able to stack the deck in some of the ways it has 
before. But happily, the US will find that it holds a number of high cards in 
negotiating the terms of cooperation with eager secondary powers because this time the US can credibly threaten to stand by and watch. 
1675. Christopher Fetteweis, (Tulane political science professor), SURVIVAL, 
September 2014, retrieved April 22, 2015 from Taylor and Francis. Another vital interest of the US, at least as defined by the willingness to spill blood in its pursuit, is credibility. According to conventional wisdom in the policy world - which, it deserves noting, is nearly unanimously rejected by scholars - credibility earned through displays of resolution can help states achieve goals in the future by affecting the calculations of others. During the Cold War, the US fought to preserve its credibility with regularity, in the belief that it was sending messages regarding its determination to defend its interests to the Soviet Union, allies and those countries on the fence. This obsession with credibility outlived the Soviet Union, despite the fact there is no longer an enemy poised to take advantage of irresolution, nor an alternative power towards which US allies or third parties could tilt. While it is far from clear that credibility ever had any real utility, it is certainly meaningless when there is no enemy to receive the messages the US tries to send. Today, the logic behind the obsession with credibility, or what Stephen Walt calls the ‗credibility fetish', is rarely articulated or examined. Credibility is pursued for its own sake, not 
so much as a tool to make future interests easier to address, but as an interest in itself. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	13 2 
 
 
 
1676. Christopher Fetteweis, (Tulane political science professor), SURVIVAL, September 2014, retrieved April 22, 2015 from Taylor and Francis. The credibility imperative has been particularly visible during the past year. When US President Barack Obama drew a rhetorical ‗red line' in Syria and then hesitated to back up the threat, critics charged him with the kind of irresolution that encourages challenges. Putin's adventurism in eastern Ukraine is only the most prominent example of the effects of diminished US credibility, according to this line of thought. Former Vice President Cheney asserted that there is ‗no question' that Putin believes Obama is weak, and that weakness encouraged Russian aggression. This criticism, which comes mostly but not exclusively from the most hawkish voices in the marketplace of ideas, also suggests that resolve and strength could somehow have deterred this action in the first place. Such critics would do well to remember one of the most basic observations of political psychology: actors routinely exaggerate their influence over the decisions of others. The crisis in Ukraine - to the extent that it is actually a crisis for the US - has regional dynamics that unfolded irrespective of Washington's actions. There is little reason to believe that American credibility factored into Moscow's calculations any more than it did during the 1970s. 
1677. Christopher Fetteweis, (Tulane political science professor), SURVIVAL, 
September 2014, retrieved April 22, 2015 from Taylor and Francis. As a general rule, there is little to fear from loss of credibility. When the Reagan administration pulled US troops out of Lebanon following the 1983 barracks bombing, to take but one of many examples, hawks were predictably apoplectic. ‗If we are driven out of Lebanon, radical and rejectionist elements will have scored a major victory', Secretary of State George Shultz said in briefings on Capitol Hill. ‗The message will be sent that relying on the Soviet Union pays off and that relying on the United States is a fatal mistake.' Michael Ledeen was more explicit: ‗our defeat in Lebanon will encourage our enemies, in the Middle East and elsewhere', he wrote. ‗In all probability, we shall pay a disproportionate price for our Lebanese failure', from the Middle East to Central America, where Soviet-sponsored guerrillas would be disastrously encouraged. As always, US allies and potential friends would be powerfully disillusioned, including the Egyptians, whom Ledeen felt would ‗increasingly distance themselves from the Camp David agreement'. Fortunately for the United States, the Soviet Union's influence in the Middle East did not increase, its guerrilla allies did not change their behavior and the Egyptians did not abandon their treaty commitments. The fears generated by lost credibility proved, as they usually are, baseless. 
1678. Gao Pan, (Xinhua writer), XINHUA, Mar. 28, 2015 retrieved April 10, 2015 


1683. Doug Palmer, (Politico reporter), POLITICO, April 16, 2015 retrieved April 17, 2015 from http://www.politico.com/story/2015/04/trade-promotion-authority-bill-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.politico.com/story/2015/04/trade-promotion-authority-bill-]orrin-hatch-ron-wyden-117043.html. Senior lawmakers reached agreement Thursday on a bipartisan trade promotion authority bill that has already ignited a fierce fight between President Barack Obama and liberal Democrats like Sen. Elizabeth Warren. Two Republicans  --  Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch and House 
Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan  --  negotiated for months on the 
--fast track‖ trade legislation with Sen. Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat who has faced intense pressure from labor and progressive groups to walk away from the talks. 
1684. Paul Kane, (Washington Post reporter), WASHINGTON POST, April 16, 2015 
retrieved April 17, 2015 from http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-]
politics/wp/2015/04/16/senators-bipartisan-bill-would-give-obama-key-powers-on- 
trade/. Sen. Richard J. Durbin (D-Ill.), the minority whip, estimated that only a quarter of Senate Democrats were in the president's camp right now. He broke down 
his caucus ranks this way: --A fourth, hell no; a fourth, lean yes; and a big group 
undecided.‖ With most Senate Republicans likely to support the fast-track legislation, most corporate and union officials expect the Senate to clear the bill in May and set up a much bigger fight in the House, where the margins are incredibly narrow at the moment. Several dozen House Republicans either come from manufacturing districts and do not support trade deals, or are just so opposed to giving Obama any new authority that they would vote no. That means Obama would need to deliver more than 30 Democrats to win passage in the House, which insiders on both sides of the aisle say is not guaranteed. 
1685. Doug Palmer, (Politico reporter), POLITICO, April 13, 2015 retrieved April 
17, 2015 from http://www.politico.com/story/2015/04/trade-fight-looms-as-congress-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.politico.com/story/2015/04/trade-fight-looms-as-congress-]returns-116896.html. Once a deal is announced, Finance Committee Chairman Hatch is expected to move quickly to a vote in the panel, where Wyden and five other Democrats could join 14 Republicans in approving the bill by a 20-6 vote. It would go next to the Senate floor where 60 votes are needed for approval because of a potential filibuster threat from Warren and others. The number should be achievable because Republicans control the chamber with 54 votes, almost all of whom are expected to vote for the bill. If Wyden can corral six to 10 Democratic votes, that could be enough to put it over the top, even though Senate Minority Leader Harry 
Reid is expected to vote against the legislation. --I don't think they'll have any trouble 
getting to 60 votes,‖ said Michael Smart, a former Senate Finance Committee staffer 

from 	http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2015-03/28/c_134104283.htm.  [HYPERLINK: http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2015-03/28/c_134104283.htm]	Senate  [HYPERLINK: http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2015-03/28/c_134104283.htm]	now at Rock Creek Global Advisors, an economic policy advisory shop. --But what 

Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch warned Tuesday that he was very worried that if lawmakers didn't reach a deal on TPA next month, it might not get done this year. It's unclear how much support Obama will need within his own party to move forward the trade agenda, but Schott expects substantial progress on TPA legislation 
in May, which could pave the way for the final negotiations of TPP over the summer. 
1679. Inside U.S. Trade, April 3, 2015 retrieved April 10, 2015 from Lexis. Some 
opponents have said they expect roughly 12 House Democrats to ultimately support TPA, but the source said there are more Democrats that are looking to vote yes. Whether or not they will do so will depend on what position Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) and Rep. Sander Levin (D-MI) take. If both of them came out in favor of fast track, it would free up more Democrats to vote yes, sources said. But sources signaled that at this time it is unlikely that Pelosi will take a favorable stance on TPA given negative signals she has given in closed-door meetings. One source said Pelosi could also be influenced by the fact that Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-MA), a high- profile Democrat, has been critical of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). However, several sources emphasized that Pelosi will use her role as a leader of the Democratic Caucus to create space for members to vote for fast track even though others will not, in order to minimize the divisiveness of the trade issue within the party. 
1680. Sarah Mimms, (National Journal correspondent), NATIONAL JOURNAL, 
Mar. 13, 2015, retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationaljournal.com/]
magazine/poll-how-many-democrats-will-president-obama-get-to-support-a-trade- 
promotion-authority-proposal-20150313. Q: How many Democrats will President Obama get to support a Trade Promotion Authority proposal? DEMOCRATS (78 VOTES) Combined with Republicans, fewer than will be needed to pass: 9% Combined with Republicans, just enough to pass: 67% A significant minority: 14% Around half: 6% More than half: 4% Combined with Republicans, fewer than will be 
needed to pass --[President] Clinton was only able to get 45 or so for fast track, and 
congressional Democrats liked him.‖ Combined with Republicans, just enough to pass --Labor is pulling out all the stops. Obama will get it across the finish line, but barely.‖ --Trade votes are bad for Dems, but enough will vote yes to pass TPA.‖ --With Obama's international standing sliding, this is a must-win for the 
administration. They'll make it worthwhile for enough Dems to bring it off.‖ 
1681. Don Lee, (LA Times reporter), LA TIMES, March 9, 2015 retrieved April 10, 
2015 from http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-obama-trade-china-20150309-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-obama-trade-china-20150309-]
story.html#page=1. Obama stands a better chance today of winning so-called fast- 
track authority than a few months ago, thanks to a stronger domestic economy and a 
midterm election that put the Senate in the hands of the Republican Party, which is historically more favorable toward trade agreements. Even so, the president needs enough Democratic backing to secure passage, and with strident opposition from corners of his own party, the White House has unleashed a full-court press on trade - with China as a major talking point. 
1682. Adam Behsudi, (Politico reporter), POLITICO, April 2, 2015 retrieved April 
10, 2015 from http://www.politico.com/story/2015/04/trade-promotion-authority-tpa-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.politico.com/story/2015/04/trade-promotion-authority-tpa-]bill-timeline-could-push-senate-to-act-116640.html. Negotiations between Hatch (R- 
Utah), who chairs the committee, its ranking member Wyden (D-Ore.) and House 
Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) are taking place at the staff level over the spring congressional break and --continue to make progress,‖ Hatch spokesman Julia Lawless said, confirming only that the senator hopes to move legislation --this spring.‖ Wyden has sought to include provisions to give Congress more power and oversight over the fast-tracking of trade deals. Quick movement on the bill, which the White House is seeking to expedite congressional consideration of a sprawling Asia-Pacific trade deal, could send Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell the signal to carve out floor time in the upcoming six-week legislative period  --  a session that will be jammed with major issues ranging from the budget 
reconciliation process to political fallout over the nuclear energy deal with Iran, and 
from cybersecurity legislation  --  a priority of the Kentucky Republican  --  to the highway funding bill. 
you'd like to see is a comfortable margin‖ to help build support among Democrats in 
the House. 
1686. Doug Palmer, (Politico reporter), POLITICO, April 13, 2015 retrieved April 
17, 2015 from http://www.politico.com/story/2015/04/trade-fight-looms-as-congress-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.politico.com/story/2015/04/trade-fight-looms-as-congress-]returns-116896.html. Republican leaders in that chamber are downplaying suggestions as many as 60 of their 244 members could vote against TPA, which 
would require 34 Democratic votes to squeak out a narrow majority. However, some 
Republicans are expected to oppose the measure, requiring an assist from Democrats to put it over the top. Estimates of potential Democratic yes votes range from as low as 10 to as high as 50, with proponents hoping for the largest bipartisan vote possible. Key to the outcome are 17 Democrats who voted for free trade agreements with Colombia, South Korea and Panama in 2011 as well as 25 more that voted for two of the pacts. 
1687. Inside U.S. Trade, April 17, 2015 retrieved April 18, 2015 from Lexis. Wyden 
spoke to reporters on Thursday afternoon just hours after bills renewing TPA and TAA were introduced in Congress. He said the deal also covered two other pieces of legislation that would be considered at the same Finance markup. They are a package on customs and enforcement issues, which is still being negotiated, and a bill to renew the Generalized System of Preferences, African Growth and Opportunity Act and Haiti trade preferences, according to congressional aides. When asked if he had a direct commitment from the House leadership that the TAA and TPA bills would face a House floor vote on the same day, Wyden said Ryan has discussed this issue with the House leadership. --The three of us have nailed that down, but Chairman Ryan . . . has talked extensively with leadership about it. But they will go separately but on the same day,‖ Wyden said. Committing to this process for the TPA and TAA bills seems aimed at allaying fears expressed by congressional Democrats and the AFL-CIO labor federation that moving TPA and TAA separately could lead to TAA 
reauthorization being voted down while TPA would be enacted. [ellipsis in original] 
1688. Vicki Needham, (the Hill reporter), THE HILL, April 8, 2015 retrieved April 
18, 2015 from http://thehill.com/policy/finance/238270-two-house-dems-signal-  [HYPERLINK: http://thehill.com/policy/finance/238270-two-house-dems-signal-]
solidarity-with-obama-in-trade-fight. Two House Democrats on Wednesday signaled 
a willingness to side with the White House in the trade fight that is splintering their party. Reps. Ron Kind (Wis.) and Brad Ashford (Neb.) argued that their states will benefit from expanded trade and the passage of trade promotion authority (TPA) legislation that will smooth approval of trade deals such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). Kind, who is chairman of the New Democrat Coalition, said that while --some past trade agreements have not lived up to their expectations,‖ the United States needs --a proactive, aggressive trade agenda that's going to work for 
American workers, our businesses and our farmers.‖ 
1689. James Arkin, (RealClearPolitics congressional reporter), REAL CLEAR 
POLITICS, March 25, 2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.realclear 
politics.com/articles/2015/03/25/house_republicans_unite_to_pass_budget.html. 
House Republicans pulled together just enough support to pass a budget Wednesday evening, a victory for an embattled leadership team that has struggled to win over its full conference on tough votes. The budget passed 228-199, with 17 Republicans joining all Democrats in voting against the measure that cuts domestic spending, ramps up military spending, repeals Obamacare and balances within a decade. Rep. Steve Scalise, the majority whip, called the vote --a very unifying experience‖ for the House GOP. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	13 3 
 
 
1690. James Arkin, ( RealClearPolitics congressional reporter), REAL CLEAR 	1697. Gary J. Schmitt, (AEI resident scholar), AMERICAN ENTERPRISE POLITICS, March 25, 2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.realclear 	INSTITUTE, Feb. 26, 2014 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.aei. 
politics.com/articles/2015/03/25/house_republicans_unite_to_pass_budget.html. 	If 	org/publication/the-missing-option-nsas-metadata-collection-program/. The Wall 

the Senate can get behind a proposal, it opens the door for the two chambers to come together and create a joint budget resolution. This would allow them to move forward on the appropriations process and also open the door to forcing a vote on repealing the Affordable Care Act. They may use a process known as reconciliation to do this because it would force a simple majority vote in the Senate, rather than the filibuster- proof 60-vote threshold, and would likely land a bill on President Obama's desk, though he would undoubtedly veto it. Those hurdles are in the future, however. For now, Republicans are celebrating a legislative victory because a majority of the party stuck together. --This is a huge deal,‖ Scalise said. --Passing a budget is a very big 
deal.‖ 
1691. Justin Sink, (Staff), THE HILL, Feb. 2, 2015 retrieved April 10, 2015 from 
http://thehill.com/homenews/administration/231386-can-obama-keep-rising.  [HYPERLINK: http://thehill.com/homenews/administration/231386-can-obama-keep-rising]
President Obama is starting February with his best poll numbers in 18 months. But how much higher can he go? Surveys showing the president hitting 50 percent approval represent a substantial comeback for Obama, who just months earlier saw his party clobbered in the midterms and his ratings into the high-30s. Now, he is 
being buoyed by dramatic rebounds among Hispanics, independents, and millennials, 
in particular. As a result, the White House has new momentum and confidence headed into a series of battles with a Republican-controlled Congress. The numbers have given the White House a coating of Teflon when it commits errors that might have been damning a year ago. It has also nudged Democrats to unify around the president. Critics of the administration say that the president is reaping the political benefits of factors he did not create, including declining gas prices and broader economic trends. 
1692. Gary Langer, (ABC News reporter), ABC NEWS, April 1, 2015 retrieved April 
18, 2015 from http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/obamas-approval-rating-flattens-albeit-  [HYPERLINK: http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/obamas-approval-rating-flattens-albeit-]
sign-gop-tailwinds/story?id=30027893. A flattened approval rating is softened by some underlying gains for Barack Obama in the latest ABC News/Washington Post poll - with no sign of tailwinds for the Republicans in Congress. After a 9-point jump in overall approval in January, Obama's landed at an even split: Forty-seven percent of Americans approve of his work in office, while 47 percent disapprove. Partisan 
Street Journal reports today that the White House is weighing four options for 
revamping NSA phone surveillance. Among the options: Have the phone companies retain the data and perform searches upon NSA and FISA court-approved request. 
Have another government agency other than the NSA hold the data, probably the 
FBI. Have an entirely new entity outside the government and the phone companies hold the data. As I have noted elsewhere, none of these options is likely to be received favorably by a majority either in Congress or the public. The phone companies definitely don't want the responsibility or liability for holding such data. And the last two alternatives, when examined closely, will come short of satisfying the civil libertarians of the left and the right. 
1698. Gregory McNeal, (Pepperdine law professor and PhD), HARVARD 
JOURNAL OF LAW AND PUBLIC POLICY, Nov. 13, 2014, retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2524067. Why [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2524067] does Congress want the FISC? Because it allows those elected representatives to push accountability off to someone else. If members of Congress are responsible for conducting oversight of secret operations, their reputations are on the line if the operations go too far toward violating civil liberties, or not far enough toward protecting national security. However, with the FISC conducting operations, Congress has the ability to dodge accountability by claiming they have empowered a court to conduct oversight. When that court gets things wrong, perhaps tightening the controls over surveillance in a way that allows threats to go undetected, elected officials can claim it was not their fault because the FISC would not let them do more. Similarly, when the court goes too far, enabling too much collection, rarely will the public hear about it. And, if the public does find out about it through leaks like Snowden's, government officials can claim the surveillance was in the interests of security, and that the activities were authorized by the courts. In both circumstances it allows elected officials to dodge political accountability. This highlights the challenge of democratic accountability in matters of national security  --  the problem is a mixed one: the FISC is not transparent about its decisions, but Congress lacks incentives to create transparency. 
1699. Spencer Ackerman, (Guardian national security editor), GUARDIAN, April 28, 

and ideological divisions are profound, including a record low in approval from 	2015 	retrieved 	April 	29, 	2015 	from 	http://www.theguardian.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.theguardian.com/]

Republicans. But Congress overall, and the Republicans who now control it, remain 
in considerably worse shape, with 22 and 27 percent approval, respectively. The latter 
shows no renaissance in GOP ratings after the party's big gains in last fall's midterm 
elections. Instead, perhaps given the fractious nature of the Republican caucus, the public by a 7-point margin says it's Obama who's taking a stronger leadership role in the government these days. 
1693. Ben Mathis-Lilley, (Slate editor), SLATE, April 16, 2015 retrieved April 18, 
profile/spencerackerman. Further imperiling the bill are civil libertarian groups that 
prefer a straight expiration of Section 215 - which authorizes the FBI to collect business records outside normal warrant or subpoena channels, and which the Justice Department has held since 2006 as the basis for domestic NSA bulk phone-records collection - to a bill they consider to insufficiently protect privacy. The USA Freedom Act, as reported by the Guardian last week, contains several concessions to pro-surveillance legislators meant to facilitate its passage. Among them are expansions of temporary spying authorities to account for surveillance targets 

2015 	from 	transiting into and out of the US, and an unrelated expansion of penalties for people 
http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2015/04/16/obama_economy  [HYPERLINK: http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2015/04/16/obama_economy]	convicted of lending --material support‖ to terrorism. 

_approval_rating_highest_since_2009.html. A new Bloomberg poll indicates Barack 
Obama's economic policies are perceived more positively than negatively by the public -- the first time that's happened in more than five years. The poll also shows the president with a positive approval rating overall, though he gets negative marks in other specific areas of policy: Bloomberg also found that a large majority of individuals (69 percent) believe the gap between the rich and poor is growing, though respondents were almost exactly split on what should be done about it: Obama's Gallup approval rating, as measured by the weekly average of the company's daily polls, is currently at 48 percent; it's been as low as 40 percent on a number of occasions, most recently in November 2014. 
1694. Bob Burnett, (retired Silicon Valley executive), HUFFINGTON POST, Mar. 
12, 2014 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/bob-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/bob-]
burnett/obama-nsa_b_4574910.html. There are three explanations for the president's 
weak NSA policy. 1. Obama decided not to expend political capital changing it. Given the economic problems he inherited from George Bush, plus the difficulty of working with a divided Congress, Obama may have decided it was not worth the effort to rein in the NSA. That's been true of national security in general. Obama had increased defense spending, expanded the national-security state, and maintained the hundreds of US military bases that dot the globe. Obama tried to shut down Guantanamo but was thwarted by Congress. 
1695. Doug Schoen, (Forbes contributor), FORBES, Aug. 16, 2013 retrieved April 
19, 2015 from http://www.forbes.com/sites/dougschoen/2013/08/16/obama-plays-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/dougschoen/2013/08/16/obama-plays-]
politics-with-the-nsa/. While I have no doubt that a degree of effort will be taken to reign in and circumscribe the purview of the NSA, an additional fact is clear: the White House is playing politics. President Obama and his staff understand that criticism of the NSA's policies is coming from both the left and the right, and that in order to respond to critics and protect what is left of the President's dwindling political capital, the White House must balance the concerns of the security community with those of the general public. 
1696. Pema Levy, (Newsweek reporter), NEWSWEEK, Jan. 17, 2014 retrieved April 
19, 2015 from http://www.newsweek.com/obama-brings-snoopers-heel-approves-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.newsweek.com/obama-brings-snoopers-heel-approves-]
spying-americans-226591. Instead, Obama chose a middle path that is in some ways typical of his approach to national security concerns. --Obama finds himself with a national security situation that he's not wild about, but does not have the political capital to do a complete about-face, nor is there a clear route out. And so he does 
1700. Tom Risen, (U.S. News & World Report technology and business reporter), 
U.S. NEWS & WORLD REPORT, April 24, 2015 retrieved May 1, 2015 from 
http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2015/04/24/revamped-usa-freedom-act-still-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2015/04/24/revamped-usa-freedom-act-still-]
faces-congressional-hurdles. House lawmakers soon will introduce a bipartisan bill that attempts to end the domestic bulk collection of Americans' phone record data by the government and address major concerns about privacy and transparency, sources briefed on the matter tell U.S. News. But the measure faces an obstacle in Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., who on Tuesday introduced a bill to reauthorize existing legal provisions used to justify domestic surveillance, which would otherwise expire on June 1. 
1701. Stan Ward, (Best VPN contributor), BEST VPN, April 28, 2015 retrieved May 
1, 2015 from https://www.bestvpn.com/blog/18191/concession-on-surveillance- makes-passage-of-bill-likely/. You may remember that the dead-in-the-water Freedom Act was doomed by privacy groups who deemed that the Obama administration and intelligence agency advocates had weakened its prohibitions on 
bulk data collection and was lacking in transparency. Supporters, however, seem 
optimistic of passage this time around with the concessions (permitting the extension of Section 215, with only minor changes) it is offering. However, significant differences still exist between the administration and the privacy and tech communities, who are not on board with seeing Section 215 extended, seeing it even in its diluted fashion as a surveillance law nonetheless. At the 11th hour, groups on both sides of the debate are working feverishly to bridge the gaps in order to make the measure palatable to privacy advocates and surveillance hawks alike. 
1702. Joan McCarter, (Daily Kos staff writer), DAILY KOS, April 22, 2015 retrieved 
May 1, 2015 from http://www.dailykos.com/story/2015/04/22/1379466/-Mitch-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.dailykos.com/story/2015/04/22/1379466/-Mitch-]
McConnell-maneuvers-to-extend-Patriot-Act-NSA-powers-outside-of-legislative- 
nbsp-process. Sen. Patrick Leahy (D-VT), who has crafted an NSA reform bill, blasted McConnell for attempting to bypass the legislative process for this, promising that this --tone-deaf attempt to pave the way for five and a half more years of unchecked surveillance will not succeed.‖ He's not alone. McConnell's also going to have a hard time getting the House to agree, since a bipartisan group of House members have been working with Leahy on reform legislation. Last year's House version of the bill, the USA Freedom Act, passed last spring 303-121. 
1703. Dustin Volz, (National Journal staff correspondent), NATIONAL JOURNAL, 

some rearranging and really tries to demonstrate that what's going on is done as 	April 	17, 	2015 	retrieved 	May 	1, 	2015 	from 

consistently as possible with what he views as national values,‖ Friedman said. --But 
that statement could have been used about Guantanamo, about torture, about 
Afghanistan, about many, many things that the United States has done since 2000.‖ 
http://www.nationaljournal.com/tech/congress-to-introduce-last-ditch-bill-to-reform-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationaljournal.com/tech/congress-to-introduce-last-ditch-bill-to-reform-]nsa-spying-20150417. Still, the measure faces several significant hurdles in both chambers before it can get to the president's desk. House Majority Whip Kevin McCarthy said in a memorandum to members earlier this month that the chamber --may‖ consider the Patriot Act reauthorization this month, without providing more specifics. But earlier this year, House Speaker John Boehner went out of his way to defend the surveillance program, saying it helped thwart a recent plot to blow up the 
U.S. Capitol. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	13 4 
 
 
 
1704. Dustin Volz, (National Journal staff correspondent), DEFENSE ONE, April 21, 2015 retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.defenseone.com/politics/2015/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.defenseone.com/politics/2015/]04/senator-who-might-scuttle-nsa-reform/110704/. Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley is not yet ready to support legislation that would curtail the National Security Agency's surveillance authorities, meaning a major roadblock to post-Snowden spying reforms has yet to budge. Despite weeks of negotiations involving his staff, the Iowa Republican said Tuesday he still has concerns about the USA Freedom Act, a bipartisan package that would effectively end the NSA's bulk collection of Americans' phone records. 
1705. Dustin Volz, (National Journal staff correspondent), DEFENSE ONE, April 21, 
2015 retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.defenseone.com/politics/2015/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.defenseone.com/politics/2015/]04/senator-who-might-scuttle-nsa-reform/110704/. Grassley's support is considered so vital that lawmakers working on the bill called an audible last week when it appeared he was not ready to sign on. The original game plan called for bicameral introduction of the measure last Tuesday, but that was dropped due in large part to 
Grassley's staff still holding reservations. Now, an influential bipartisan cohort of 
House lawmakers is expected to reintroduce the Freedom Act on Wednesday, with plans to pass it through the House Judiciary Committee as soon as Thursday. A vote on the House floor could come as soon as next week. 
1706. Dustin Volz, (National Journal staff correspondent), DEFENSE ONE, April 21, 
2015 retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.defenseone.com/politics/2015/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.defenseone.com/politics/2015/]04/senator-who-might-scuttle-nsa-reform/110704/. Grassley's deference to the Senate Intelligence Committee does not slam the door shut on the possibility that he may come around on the Freedom Act, but it is unlikely to give NSA critics much 
reassurance. Sen. Richard Burr, the panel's chairman, has been a forceful defender of 
the intelligence agency's spying operations. A privacy advocate involved in negotiations over the bill told National Journal last week it was --not impossible‖ that Grassley may sign on as a cosponsor of the Freedom Act -- though the advocate cautioned that this scenario seemed increasingly unlikely. 
1707. Dustin Volz, (National Journal staff correspondent), NATIONAL JOURNAL, 
April 17, 2015 retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal.com/tech/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationaljournal.com/tech/]congress-to-introduce-last-ditch-bill-to-reform-nsa-spying-20150417. But as the House barrels ahead, it remains unclear what strategy the bill's advocates in the 
Senate, led chiefly by Sen. Patrick Leahy, intend to deploy. That question is 
complicated by the implications a fractious national security debate could have for the Republican caucus, whose three presidential aspirants -- Sens. Ted Cruz, Rand Paul, and Marco Rubio -- have adopted increasingly divergent positions on NSA surveillance. 
1708. Conor Friedersdorf, (Atlantic staff writer), THE ATLANTIC< Jan. 27, 2014 
retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/01/nsa-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/01/nsa-]surveillance-divides-the-republican-party/283351/. Republicans have already done a good job over the past decade in squandering their traditional advantage in the national-security arena-for example by supporting sequestration, which could have a 
devastating impact on our military readiness and by not supporting strong action to 
stop the bloodshed in Syria. Now a certain segment of the GOP appears determined to get to the left of President Obama in the war on terrorism. Earlier I called this the Rand Paul wing of the GOP; it might just as well be called the Maxine Waters wing. When Republicans see eye-to-eye with the most extreme doves in the Democratic Party, it's time for a gut check. 
1709. James Hohmann, (Staff), POLITICO, Dec. 2, 2014 retrieved May 1, 2015 from 
http://www.politico.com/story/2014/12/republican-fault-lines-113232.html. Almost  [HYPERLINK: http://www.politico.com/story/2014/12/republican-fault-lines-113232.html]all Republicans rallied to then-President George W. Bush's defense when it came out 
during his second term that he secretly allowed the National Security Agency to do 
warrantless surveillance of foreigners' communications with Americans. But in 2013, the leaks by Snowden revealed that the agency's efforts went far beyond what was already known, generating huge debate over how much surveillance is too much. Perhaps no potential 2016er has capitalized more on the Snowden affair than Paul, whose libertarian leanings have energized that wing of the GOP. The senator has sued the federal government to stop bulk collection of Americans' data. In the process, he has run headlong into what might be called the Dick Cheney wing of the party, which never apologizes for the government doing anything that could stop a terrorist attack 
on U.S. soil. 
1710. James Hohmann, (Staff), POLITICO, Dec. 2, 2014 retrieved May 1, 2015 from 
http://www.politico.com/story/2014/12/republican-fault-lines-113232.html. Some [HYPERLINK: http://www.politico.com/story/2014/12/republican-fault-lines-113232.html] of the governors considering 2016 runs also have taken Paul's position on the NSA to task by framing it within the broader issue of protecting the country, especially amid spreading turbulence in the Middle East. In the summer of 2013, Christie suggested Paul failed to understand the danger of terrorism, saying that those who challenge surveillance programs should hear from the relatives of Sept. 11 victims. Walker has said he is somewhere --in between‖ Christie and Paul on NSA wiretapping. He, as 
most other candidates probably will, called for --a balanced approach.‖ 
1711. Dustin Volz, (National Journal staff correspondent), NATIONAL JOURNAL, 
April 17, 2015 retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal. com/tech/congress-to-introduce-last-ditch-bill-to-reform-nsa-spying-20150417. The Senate, meanwhile, will need enough Republicans to vote for a bill many view as potentially soft on national security -- and endure a potential sideshow among Sens. Cruz, Paul, and Rubio, each of whom may try to leverage the issue to score political points. While Cruz voted for the Freedom Act last year, Paul and Rubio voted it down, though for opposing reasons. Rubio warned the bill could bolster terrorists and jeopardize American lives, while Paul said it did not go far enough. Paul's vote 
against the bill was viewed as especially significant, given his position as a 
libertarian-leaning Republican who has vowed to end NSA spying --on day one‖ if elected president. Though he contends he cannot vote for any measure that reauthorizes the Patriot Act, some observers have suggested his vote was an attempt 
to keep the surveillance debate alive in order to bolster his White House campaign. 


1712. Dustin Volz, (National Journal staff correspondent), NATIONAL JOURNAL, April 5, 2015 retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal.com/tech/2016-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationaljournal.com/tech/2016-]gop-nsa-reform-debate-20150405. Rand Paul and Ted Cruz are not going to just talk about government spying during their presidential campaigns. The tea party senators are going to force the other Republican White House hopefuls to talk about it, too. That's because few policy zones divide the GOP more than the National Security 
Agency's mass surveillance programs. And on crowded primary debate stages, every 
candidate will be jockeying with the rest of the field to separate themselves from the rest of the pack. 
1713. Matthew Feeney, (Reason Magazine writer), REASON, Jan. 21, 2014 retrieved 
May 1, 2015 from http://reason.com/blog/2014/01/21/new-poll-highlights-divide-in-  [HYPERLINK: http://reason.com/blog/2014/01/21/new-poll-highlights-divide-in-]gop-over-n. Although more than half of Republicans may disapprove of the NSA's metadata collection, Pew notes that there is a divide within the GOP on the issue: There continues to be a substantial divide within the Republican base: Republicans and Republican leaners who agree with the Tea Party are overwhelmingly opposed to 
the NSA program, while those who do not identify with the Tea Party are more 
divided. This difference within the GOP is perhaps best highlighted by the differences between Rep. Peter King (R-N.Y.), one of the NSA's staunchest defenders, and Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.), who is leading a suit against the NSA over its surveillance activities. 
1714. Jeff Stone, (International Business Times reporter), INTERNATIONAL 
BUSINESS TIMES, Nov. 24, 2014 retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.ibtimes.com/nsa-reform-could-pit-gop-hawks-against-partys-libertarian-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.ibtimes.com/nsa-reform-could-pit-gop-hawks-against-partys-libertarian-]wing-1728633. --There's enough uneasiness and opposition to the NSA‖ that the GOP 
is split over what to do next, said Robert Jervis, a professor of political science and 
international affairs at Columbia University. Still, --there's a broad political coalition that's in favor of surveillance,‖ said Abraham Newman, an associate professor at the School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University. Normally hawkish Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, voted for the bill. Incoming Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., referring to the terrorist group ISIS, said now is --the worst time to tie our hands behind our backs‖ and voted against it. 
1715. Dustin Volz, (National Journal staff correspondent), NATIONAL JOURNAL, 
April 5, 2015 retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal.com/tech/2016-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationaljournal.com/tech/2016-]gop-nsa-reform-debate-20150405. The most pronounced fault line among the 
candidates is whether the NSA should continue its bulk collection of Americans' call 
records -- the first and likely most controversial program exposed by the Edward Snowden disclosures. Paul wants to end it completely; Cruz was one of just four Republicans to cross the aisle and support a Democrat-backed NSA reform bill, which narrowly failed to advance. Paul voted down the measure on grounds it didn't go far enough. 
1716. Alex Brown, (National Journal reporter), NATIONAL JOURNAL, March 31, 
2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal.com/congress/free-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationaljournal.com/congress/free-]trade-democrats-face-campaign-pressure-20150331. With or without Wyden's 
support, most observers expect TPA to pass the Senate -- but the outcome in the 
House is still an open question. --The most obvious place that there's a real opportunity to stop this is in the House,‖ Drake said, but acknowledged: --We are in the uphill battle position.‖ Most Republicans support TPA on principle but have also balked at expanding Obama's authority in many instances. And Speaker John Boehner's struggles to earn consensus in his caucus have been well documented. --He's going to need to get votes from Democrats -- there's no doubt about it,‖ said Third Way's Jim Kessler, who supports the deal. --Some Democrats are starting to listen  but there's a substantial amount that are just going to reflexively oppose it.‖ 
[ellipsis in original] 
1717. Alex Brown, (National Journal reporter), NATIONAL JOURNAL, March 31, 
2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal.com/congress/free-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationaljournal.com/congress/free-]trade-democrats-face-campaign-pressure-20150331. The pro-trade aide said the number of House Democrats who will support the deal could range from 10 to 45, but the aide added that Republicans are likely to have the votes regardless. --The real question is going to be how much Boehner can keep his troops together on this, and I suspect he's going to do a fairly decent job on this issue,‖ he said. 
1718. Alex Brown, (National Journal reporter), NATIONAL JOURNAL, March 8, 
2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal.com/congress/white-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationaljournal.com/congress/white-]house-gives-moderate-democrats-extra-attention-on-free-trade-20150308. And GOP support still is not a given. Conservatives like Reps. Walter Jones and Duncan Hunter have said they oppose the measure, wary of giving the White House any more authority. At the end of last year, 19 House Republicans signed a letter calling on their colleagues not to pass TPA in the lame-duck session. But Ways and Means Chairman Paul Ryan has said he believes the GOP has the votes to get it passed, but would prefer bipartisan support. --You can see a whole variety of situations opening up here, and that depends on the internal politics of the Republican conference,‖ said a moderate Democratic aide. He Ryan's role in pushing for TPA could assuage many skeptical conservatives. 
1719. George Will, (Washington Post reporter), WASHINGTON POST, March 6, 
2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/obama-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/obama-]
needs-the-aid-of-the-gop/2015/03/06/37213496-c365-11e4-ad5c-3b8ce89f1b89_ 
story.html. The two largest achievements during Bill Clinton's presidency occurred in spite of Democrats. Welfare reform was forced upon him by a Republican-controlled Congress (he vetoed it twice before relenting), and the North American Free Trade Agreement was ratified in spite of congressional Democrats (a majority of whom voted against it). Now, the TPP  --  potentially the best result of the Obama years  --  depends on Republicans. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	13 5 
 
 
 
1720. John Kehoe, (Financial Review reporter), AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL REVIEW, Mar. 29, 2015, retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://www.afr.com/news/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.afr.com/news/]
world/north-america/obama-scrambles-at-home-for-asia-trade-deal-20150329- 
1m9u8b. Many Republicans in the 435-seat conservative-controlled House have signaled they will support granting Mr Obama TPA, but the President still needs an estimated 40 to 50 House Democrats to win a majority. --The President will have the challenging task of having to deal with the politics of his own party because there is minority support among Democrats for free trade,‖ said Scott Miller, Center for Strategic and International Studies international business adviser in Washington. A senior Democratic aide said Democrats could support TPA legislation that pledges high labor and environmental standards in the TPP. --It's going to depend on the administration really ramping up the case forcefully to members that this is a substantial improvement to the NAFTA [North American Free Trade Agreement] model on trade,‖ the aide said. 
1721. Justin Sink, (the Hill reporter), THE HILL, Feb. 2, 2015 retrieved April 10, 
2015 from http://thehill.com/homenews/administration/231386-can-obama-keep-  [HYPERLINK: http://thehill.com/homenews/administration/231386-can-obama-keep-]rising. And there's anecdotal evidence Obama is reaping the benefits of stronger poll numbers. House Democrats leapt to their feet when the president implored them last Thursday to be proud  --  not shy or defensive  --  of what they care about. The botched rollout of his plan to tax college savings accounts faded from the headlines 
relatively quickly. --They'll run from you like crazy if they sense there's a problem, as 
we could see in the last election,‖ said Democratic strategist Peter Fenn. --But now we've got a situation where both the mistakes of the Republicans and the strength of 
Obama is fortifying a lot of Democrats' backbone.‖ 
1722. Mark R. Kennedy, (Minnesota Economic Club president), FOREIGN POLICY, 
Jan. 14, 2015 retrieved April 10, 2015 from https://foreignpolicy.com/2015/01/14/is- a-major-trade-deal-the-way-for-obama-to-secure-his-legacy/. Trade is one of the most likely areas where the president and congressional Republicans can work together. Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) said in regards to TPA 
that he wants to --get it done, get it done right, and get it done soon.‖ Yet history 
shows that a president cannot outsource the job of promoting trade to a supportive committee chairman or his capable U.S. trade representative. President Obama must personally actively engage on the issue in order to have any chance for success. This is trade's hour. It is Obama's best chance to act in tandem with Congress. Trade can 
provide the economic boost necessary to offset the economic headwinds we still face. 
1723. Alex Brown, (National Journal reporter), NATIONAL JOURNAL, March 8, 
2015 retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal.com/congress/white-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationaljournal.com/congress/white-]house-gives-moderate-democrats-extra-attention-on-free-trade-20150308. Despite all 
this, much of the caucus has held its fire on Obama's forthcoming proposal, and party 
leaders say they want to give Obama a chance. --We're hopeful that the administration will take steps that will allow a significant number of the caucus to get to yes,‖ House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer said last month. --We're working on those. Hopefully the administration will be able to get many to a path to yes, but that's yet to be determined.‖ A House Democratic leadership aide added that Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi is --hoping we can get to some place where we can get to 150 Democrats for a 
bill.‖ Still, he noted, --that's gonna take a lot of work.‖ 
1724. Leon Hadard, (American University International Service PhD), BUSINESS 
TIME SINGAPORE, Feb. 18, 2015 retrieved April 10, 2015 from Lexis. So the main goal of President Obama should now be to persuade enough members of his own party to join a majority of Republicans to pass the TPA. The White House and Republican leaders are quite confident that a clear majority of Republicans and centrist Democrats would support the TPA in the Senate, but are not so sure about the legislative balance of power in the House. As of now, 16 Republicans in the House have stated that they would vote against approving the TPA. But supporters of --fast track‖ believe that they could win the backing of between 25 and 50 centrist Democrats in the House which could help neutralize the votes of Republican opponents. The White House, led by United State Trade Representative Michael Froman, has been trying to persuade wavering Democrats that the TPP includes provisions aimed at raising labor and environmental standards in the Asia-Pacific region and will create a powerful regional trade bloc that would provide Washington with more leverage during future trade negotiations with China (which will not be a member of the TPP). 
1725. Doug Palmer, (Politico reporter), POLITICO, April 13, 2015 retrieved April 
17, 2015 from http://www.politico.com/story/2015/04/trade-fight-looms-as-congress-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.politico.com/story/2015/04/trade-fight-looms-as-congress-]
returns-116896.html. The critical moment will be when the bill hits the floor, a test of both the White House's ability to convince wavering Democrats to support a lame- duck president's legacy achievement and Republican leaders to persuade their members who loathe Obama to give him a political victory. Multiple House Democratic aides, whose bosses are on the fence, note the extreme political difficulty that could come with voting for a TPA bill that could be only supported by 10 to 15 other Democrats. --This is the most difficult vote Democrats will take this Congress, by a wide margin,‖ one aide said, noting that unions are in lockstep on opposing the deal  --  even groups, like the longshoremen, who would benefit from increased trade. 
1726. William Mauldin, (Wall Street Journal reporter), WALL STREET JOURNAL, 
April 17, 2015 retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://www.wsj.com/articles/obama-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.wsj.com/articles/obama-]tries-tough-sale-of-trade-deal-to-fellow-democrats-1429312837. The White House already has launched a quiet but sustained lobbying effort aimed at persuading enough Democrats to join Republicans in backing legislation that would allow Congress to vote on trade pacts but not to amend the deals. With debate now under way in Congress, Mr. Obama is gearing up to make a more aggressive, personal pitch in the coming weeks. In addition to reaching out to lawmakers, the president will make the case directly to opponents in his own party through public events around the 
country and through what a White House official described as --targeted media 
engagements.‖ 


1727. Stratfor Global Intelligence, April 16, 2015 retrieved April 17, 2015 from https://www.stratfor.com/analysis/us-potential-breakthrough-trans-pacific-trade-talks. The United States' Trade Promotion Authority bill is likely to be released from committee today, paving the way for a congressional vote to give the president so- called fast track authority. Congress would also be allowed to vote on foreign trade agreements, but only as an up-or-down vote rather than on individual line items. The 
lack of trade promotion authority has delayed U.S. negotiations with its Asian 
partners on the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Moreover, the potential to pass the Trade Promotion Authority just before Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe visits Washington on April 27 could signal an imminent breakthrough in Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations. However, the passage of the Trade Promotion Authority bill might not have the same impact on U.S. talks in Europe on the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership. The Trans-Pacific Partnership initiative is, in part, Washington's way of increasing trade in Asia. It is also a response to growing Chinese economic ties in one of the few economically vibrant regions of the world. 
Key to the creation of the trade partnership is the inclusion of Japan, the second 
largest economy in Asia. Once Japan signs on, other countries are likely to see the benefit of trade incentives with the United States and Japan, finalizing their participation. 
1728. Phil Levy, (Foreign Policy reporter), FOREIGN POLICY, Aug. 3, 2013 
retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://shadow.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2013/08/08/  [HYPERLINK: http://shadow.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2013/08/08/]getting_trade_negotiators_flights_to_actually_lead_somewhere. To be helpful, though, let me offer a suggestion: Fully restore funding for the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative. In fact, be generous and allow business-class travel more 
liberally. But attach this funding to a broad, new --trade promotion authority‖ bill, the 
sort of measure that senators such as Rob Portman (R-Ohio) have been pushing for years, with no administration support. If done properly, such a bill would grant negotiating authority for the full range of agreements on the U.S. agenda - the Trans- Pacific Partnership, the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, and an international services agreement under the World Trade Organization. It would resolve difficult open issues about the stances negotiators should take on labor, the environment, intellectual property, and regulation. That's likely to be a fractious debate. But with trade promotion authority in hand, we can have more confidence that U.S. negotiators' intercontinental flights will actually lead somewhere. 
1729. Dean Kleckner, (Truth About Trade & Technology chairman), IOWA 
FARMER TODAY, May 24, 2012 retrieved April 18, 2015 from 
http://www.iowafarmertoday.com/news/opinion/obama-needs-trade-promotion-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.iowafarmertoday.com/news/opinion/obama-needs-trade-promotion-]authority-to-complete-unfinished-business-of/article_bb14d68c-a5da-11e1-b9e3- 
001a4bcf887a.html. Yet, the administration said hardly a word about the one thing it will need before it can achieve any new breakthroughs in trade diplomacy: Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), which calls on Congress to give pending trade agreements an up-or-down vote in a reasonable period of time. IN TRUTH, the nearly 400-page report devoted a sentence to TPA: --The Obama administration will 
explore issues regarding additional trade promotion authority necessary to approve 
the TPP and future trade agreements.‖ A whole sentence! That's a pretty weak commitment. When politicians promise to --explore issues,‖ you can bet they aren't about to embark on courageous voyages of discovery. Instead, they're hoping the issues in question will go away. 
1730. Dean Kleckner, (Truth About Trade & Technology chairman), IOWA 
FARMER TODAY, May 24, 2012 retrieved April 18, 2015 from 
http://www.iowafarmertoday.com/news/opinion/obama-needs-trade-promotion-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.iowafarmertoday.com/news/opinion/obama-needs-trade-promotion-]authority-to-complete-unfinished-business-of/article_bb14d68c-a5da-11e1-b9e3- 
001a4bcf887a.html. THE 2012 Trade Policy Agenda rightly points to the Trans- 
Pacific Partnership (TPP), a multilateral agreement that currently includes the United States and eight partners. The markets in these nations are worth $89 billion to U.S. exporters. They currently support half a million U.S. jobs. By lowering tariffs for 
U.S. goods and services, TPP will create even more economic opportunity. If Canada, 
Japan, and Mexico enter the talks  --  something they may do soon  --  the potential 
gains rise considerably. Yet, none of it will matter unless the president has TPA. President Obama should ask for it  --  in fact, he should demand it  --  far more vigorously than he has in the 2012 Trade Policy Agenda. Right now, President Obama's legacy on trade is to have completed the unfinished business of the Bush years. If the president wants to make gains of his own  --  and TPP surely counts  --  he'll need Trade Promotion Authority. The first step is to ask for it. 
1731. Matthew Goodman, (CSIS political economy chair), CSIS, December 2013 
retrieved April 18, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/publication/131220_Global_  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publication/131220_Global_]
Economics_Monthly_v2issue12.pdf. The U.S. Congress can support the economic leg of the rebalance in several important ways. First, enacting trade promotion authority legislation would give the administration the guidance and certainty it needs to close a high-standard TPP deal; without TPA, it is difficult to see how the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) can persuade its counterparts that it can fulfill its end of the bargain. 
1732. Ann Veneman, (former Agriculture secretary), THE HILL, Mar. 11, 2015 
retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://thehill.com/opinion/op-ed/235444-trade-  [HYPERLINK: http://thehill.com/opinion/op-ed/235444-trade-]promotion-authority-sows-growth-in-american-agriculture. Key to our ability to negotiate and implement market-opening agreements has been enactment of trade negotiating authority. This authority, now called trade promotion authority (TPA), ensures U.S. credibility to conclude the best deal possible at the negotiating table. TPA also ensures common negotiating objectives between the president and Congress, and a continuous consultation process prior to final Congressional approval or disapproval of a trade agreement. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	13 6 
 
 
 
1733. Patrick Cronin, (New American Security Asia-Pacific Security Program director), STRAITS TIMES, Mar. 18, 2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
http://www.straitstimes.com/news/opinion/more-opinion-stories/story/why-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.straitstimes.com/news/opinion/more-opinion-stories/story/why-the-]
pacific-trade-pact-the-us-national-interest-20150318. First, the TPP would help to reverse the impression that the US is a declining and one-dimensional military power. Whatever the image of US power in North America, Asia-Pacific countries continue to harbour considerable doubt about American staying power and strength relative to a rising China. Even our closest allies in the region are enhancing their economic and development ties with China. At the same time, they and others fear what continued US military dominance could bring to the region in dealing with the increasing tension among major powers. A multilateral trade pact accentuates the dimension of US power and interest that appeals to all actors in the Asia-Pacific region. In Asia, trade is the coin of the realm. The TPP rebrands America as a leading market power, rather than just a security guarantor that brings big guns to settle local disputes. In addition, the TPP bolsters a model of sustainable economic growth that is essential to maintaining our long-term security posture, both with respect to defense spending and forward military presence. 
1734. Patrick Cronin, (New American Security Asia-Pacific Security Program 
director), STRAITS TIMES, Mar. 18, 2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
http://www.straitstimes.com/news/opinion/more-opinion-stories/story/why-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.straitstimes.com/news/opinion/more-opinion-stories/story/why-the-]
pacific-trade-pact-the-us-national-interest-20150318. Second, the Pacific trade pact would do more to reassure our key allies than simply tinkering on the margins of our military presence. Our presence is vital. But if we want to signal that we are serious 
about being a permanent Pacific power, then long-term trade frameworks are more 
compelling. Despite our military activity, Japan and Australia remain anxious about our future intentions. That is not good, given how important these allies are. Indeed, Australia is becoming increasingly important for rotational presence and exercising, and the only other country beyond Japan and South Korea where we can imagine being prepared to conduct --Phase 2‖ combined operations designed to --seize the initiative‖. The converse of reassurance would be an action - or in this case, inaction 
- that would sow great doubt on American credibility. The failure to complete this 
trade pact would strike a serious blow to our reputation, and one from which it would 
be difficult to recover. 
1735. Patrick Cronin, (New American Security Asia-Pacific Security Program 
director), STRAITS TIMES, Mar. 18, 2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
http://www.straitstimes.com/news/opinion/more-opinion-stories/story/why-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.straitstimes.com/news/opinion/more-opinion-stories/story/why-the-]
pacific-trade-pact-the-us-national-interest-20150318. A third and related national interest in completing the TPP is that it would allow the US to entrench itself in the world's most dynamic world and thereby reach out to new partners in non-military ways. This simultaneously enables such new engagement and lowers the transaction 
costs on our security cooperation throughout the region. Importantly, among the other 
initial stakeholders in the TPP are three of the four South-east Asian countries with disputed claims in the South China Sea. The fourth, the Philippines, is already a treaty ally of the US. But with this trade pact, the US would be able to tighten cooperation with Vietnam, Malaysia and Brunei without having to focus exclusively on maritime defense issues. In addition, the TPP would also solidify US ties with Chile and Peru, two key South American economies with a Pacific orientation. Thus, we can expand our regional partners while underscoring our broad Pacific role. 
1736. Patrick Cronin, (New American Security Asia-Pacific Security Program 
director), STRAITS TIMES, Mar. 18, 2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
http://www.straitstimes.com/news/opinion/more-opinion-stories/story/why-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.straitstimes.com/news/opinion/more-opinion-stories/story/why-the-]
pacific-trade-pact-the-us-national-interest-20150318. Fourth, the TPP gives us leverage in the decade ahead as we begin negotiations on second-round entrants. This could be a major tool for engaging China, given that our clear objective is to integrate a rising China, not to contain it. It also gives us a potential tool for managing Taiwan, whose growing dependence on the mainland is leaving it little international space for avoiding coercion. Other allies, notably South Korea, would like to join, and ought to be at the front of the queue. The US-Thai alliance has been undermined by political instability in Thailand, and trade may provide a path toward alliance renewal. Finally, 
other key regional actors, especially Indonesia, could be prepared for admission in a 
second round, making the TPP a dominant trade framework for the region. 
1737. Patrick Cronin, (New American Security Asia-Pacific Security Program 
director), STRAITS TIMES, Mar. 18, 2015 retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
http://www.straitstimes.com/news/opinion/more-opinion-stories/story/why-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.straitstimes.com/news/opinion/more-opinion-stories/story/why-the-]
pacific-trade-pact-the-us-national-interest-20150318. Fifth, a regional trade pact would preserve and adapt a largely US-created regional architecture as we compete to shape the 21st century global order. What we want is what all nations in the region should want: namely, unfettered access to trade and the global commons. The TPP 
would reinforce a regional coalition around common high-standard trade norms and 
rules, and thereby balance against alternative rule sets that, for instance, favor state- owned enterprises. The aim is not US primacy so much as the primacy of a rules- based system. For all of these reasons, beyond the obvious economic ones of expanding trade in relatively new sectors as well as services, the TPP is squarely in the national security interest of the US and the Asia-Pacific region. 
1738. Christopher Johnston, (Georgetown Institute for the Study of Diplomacy 
fellow), THE DIPLOMAT, Mar. 11, 2014 retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
http://thediplomat.com/2014/03/trans-pacific-partnership-time-for-some-american-  [HYPERLINK: http://thediplomat.com/2014/03/trans-pacific-partnership-time-for-some-american-]
hustle/. The United States can expect diminishing returns for as long as trade policy is 
skewed away from the Asia-Pacific. Also, the U.S. has a shrinking window of opportunity to structure the international trading environment in its favor. Although trade between the U.S. and Asia continues to grow, the American share of Asian international trade has actually declined by nine percent since 1990. In part, this is because Asian nations continue to broker preferential deals among themselves. Regional governments are drawing up a new architecture for international trade, which threatens to draw --a line down the middle of the Pacific.‖ ASEAN's ten member states - along with Australia, China, Japan, India, South Korea, and New Zealand are now working towards the world's largest-ever regional trade agreement, 
the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP). This proliferation of 
free-trade agreements will proceed with or without U.S. involvement. It is in American interests to exercise leadership in designing this system, or risk becoming politically and economically isolated in the region. China's promotion of the RCEP threatens just that. 


1739. Christopher Johnston, (Georgetown Institute for the Study of Diplomacy fellow), THE DIPLOMAT, Mar. 11, 2014 retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
http://thediplomat.com/2014/03/trans-pacific-partnership-time-for-some-american-  [HYPERLINK: http://thediplomat.com/2014/03/trans-pacific-partnership-time-for-some-american-]
hustle/. Obama has invited China to join the TPP, and the agreement could form a building block towards a wider Free Trade Agreement of the Asia-Pacific Region (FTAAP) - a goal endorsed by APEC leaders in 2006. Such an outcome is to be 
encouraged. It would buttress America's economic stake in the Asia-Pacific for the 
foreseeable future, as well as encourage U.S.-Sino cooperation across a range of international issues. One such issue likely to be addressed by the TPP is the protection of U.S. intellectual property. The requirement for --adequate and effective protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights‖ was clearly enunciated in Article 1.1 of the TPP Main Agreement. Indeed, the TPP is reported to establish binding rules on everything from service-sector regulation, investment, patents and copyrights, government procurement, financial regulation, and labor and environmental standards, as well as trade in industrial goods and agriculture. Action 
across all of these issues is more urgent among the developing countries of the Asia- 
Pacific than in the prosperous EU. 
1740. Fred Hiatt, (Washington Post editorial page editor), WASHINGTON POST, 
Feb. 10, 2013, retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://www.washingtonpost. 
com/opinions/fred-hiatt-tensions-in-asia-add-urgency-to-obamas- 
pivot/2013/02/10/6bc8fb12-723a-11e2-ac36-3d8d9dcaa2e2_story.html.It'sintriguing to speculate on the ghostly whisperings these leaders may hear. It may be more useful, though, to focus on the national weaknesses that may propel them to act. North Korea is a failed and hungry state for which blackmail and bluster have long 
been the only survival strategy. China is a rising power and a growing economy  --  
but led by a one-party regime that may be tempted to use nationalism to distract a restive population from domestic troubles. Japan has discarded one prime minister after another, pretty much on an annual basis, for most of the past decade, an instability that leaves it punching below its economic and military weight. All of this makes the region hungry for U.S. presence and leadership, which Obama understood with his first-term promise of a --pivot‖ to Asia. Regional leaders hope he can make good on that promise in a second term but wonder whether U.S. policy, too, will be shaped by political weakness. They notice when the Navy announces that it is, again, reducing its planned number of ships or Defense Secretary Leon Panetta orders an 
aircraft carrier kept in port because of budgetary constraints. They wonder who will 
inherit the Asia focus of former secretary of state Hillary Rodham Clinton and departing assistant secretary Kurt Campbell. They see the dangers, from Mali to Kandahar, that pull Obama's attention. They hope it won't take a more dangerous crisis in their region to make the pivot a reality. 
1741. Kati Suominen, (CSIS adjunct fellow), FOREIGN POLICY, July 6, 2012, 
retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://foreignpolicy.com/2012/07/06/america-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://foreignpolicy.com/2012/07/06/america-the-]absent/. The welcome momentum in negotiations between the United States and Pacific Rim countries on the Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade agreement does not 
undo over three years of drift in U.S. trade policy that has jeopardized the very global 
trading system that the United States built and powered in the postwar era. The only trade deals that the Obama administration has passed  --  with Colombia, Panama, and South Korea  --  were launched and negotiated by the Bush administration. The world is now facing a triple threat of global economic instability, divisions among top powers, and a global leadership vacuum. This perfect storm could produce a world disorder of mercurial financial markets, widening global imbalances, spreading state capitalism, and beggar-thy-neighbor protectionism  --  a scenario with a sorry past and few safe exits. In the late 1940s, a new world order arose because of American 
strength, vision, and leadership, not because global governance was in vogue. 
Leadership was never easy: Resistance from allies, protectionist pressures at home, and resource-draining wars all stood in the way. But capitalism spread, trade and financial markets were liberalized, and emerging-market crises were defeated. Global economic integration forged ahead. Today, American leadership is again essential. China prioritizes mercantilism over multilateralism, and emerging nations have yet to fully step up to the plate when it comes to global governance, while Europe and Japan are neither able nor willing to lead. In placing their faith in multilateralism, liberal institutionalists often fail to realize that the world economic order is built on 
American primacy and power, and Washington's willingness to project it. 
1742. Ann Veneman, (former Agriculture secretary), THE HILL, Mar. 11, 2015 
retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://thehill.com/opinion/op-ed/235444-trade-  [HYPERLINK: http://thehill.com/opinion/op-ed/235444-trade-]promotion-authority-sows-growth-in-american-agriculture. As former secretaries of Agriculture, we know firsthand the importance of international trade to America's farm and ranch families, to our nation's rural communities, and to the U.S. economy as a whole. There's no other sector of the U.S. economy where the link between trade and prosperity is clearer than in agriculture. Foreign sales account for almost a third of total U.S. farm income. For many commodities, the bulk of total production is now exported, with about 80 percent of U.S.-grown cotton, over two-thirds of U.S. tree 
nuts and about half of U.S. rice, soybeans and wheat destined for foreign markets. 
Not only do those international sales benefit the farmers who grow the products, they help support more than 1 million American jobs in both farming and related sectors such as food processing and transportation. America's farmers and ranchers are the most productive in the world. In fact, their productivity is growing faster than domestic food demand. Thus, the continued success of our farm and food sector relies on having access to the 95 percent of the world's consumers who live outside the United States. 
1743. Ann Veneman, (former Agriculture secretary), THE HILL, Mar. 11, 2015 
retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://thehill.com/opinion/op-ed/235444-trade-  [HYPERLINK: http://thehill.com/opinion/op-ed/235444-trade-]
promotion-authority-sows-growth-in-american-agriculture. Despite the success U.S. farm exports have enjoyed over the past two decades, we still have more to do. The United States is now working to conclude negotiations for the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), which will significantly reduce the barriers U.S. products face in the fast-growing Asia-Pacific region. If we don't close the TPP deal, U.S. producers will be at a competitive disadvantage as Australia, New Zealand, the European Union and other countries aggressively negotiate trade agreements in the region. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	13 7 
 
 
 
1744. Michael E. Brown, (GWU Elliott School of International Affairs dean), WASHINGTON POST, Feb. 6, 2015, retrieved April 10, 2015 from 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2015/02/06/trade-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2015/02/06/trade-]
partnerships-are-an-opportunity-not-to-be-missed/. Third, TPP and TTIP pacts would strengthen Obama's personal credibility and the United States' international leadership position. Obama's failure to enforce his --red line‖ on the use of chemical weapons by the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has done real damage to his credibility in the Middle East, Asia and around the world. Effective presidential leadership in these trade negotiations would help to restore Obama's international credibility. A TPP agreement would also solidify the economic pillar of Obama's --pivot‖ to Asia - a geostrategic priority. More generally, effective U.S. leadership on TPP and TTIP would enhance the United States' standing in an era when many countries need strategic reassurance and want U.S. engagement. Fourth and last, economic strength is one of the fundamentals of national and international power. This has been true for hundreds of years, and it might apply with even more force today, given the emergence of a truly global economy. In a world where national power and balance of power considerations are still important - where some states are failing and others are flailing - it is essential for the United States and its allies to strengthen their economic fundamentals and economic ties. TPP and TTIP agreements would help. 
1745. Robert B. Zoellick, (former World Bank president), WALL STREET 


1749. Kati Suominen (CSIS adjunct fellow), ZOCALO PUBLIC SQUARE, Dec. 29, 2014 retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://www.zocalopublicsquare.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.zocalopublicsquare.org/]
2014/12/29/will-globalization-be-obamas-greatest-foreign-policy- 
legacy/ideas/nexus/. The two trans-oceanic pacts that would link us to Asia and Europe, though, would resurrect the momentum for a more comprehensive global agreement. They would also deliver considerable economic benefits. The Trans- Pacific deal (TPP) will boost U.S. annual gains by $77 billion, and Japan's by $104 billion. The TTIP deal, by integrating markets in the U.S. and the EU, would generate 
$130 billion annually in economic gains for the United States, and $162 billion for 
Europe. As such, it is estimated that TTIP will boost U.S. household incomes by $865 
annually and create 750,000 new U.S. jobs, while TPP would generate about $1,230 per household by 2025-a great boost without a dime of deficit spending, and a strong bonus on top of the $10,000 annual income gains American households have already scored due to post-war trade opening. These trade deals, by locking in deeper access for American interests in overseas markets, could give U.S. companies the confidence needed to unlock their considerable cash holdings and invest in the production of more export goods and the hiring of more U.S. workers. While big business spearheads the trade lobby, --Main Street‖ small businesses stand to gain from greater access to foreign markets and the harmonizing of product standards and regulations across borders. 
1750. Miriam Sapiro, (Brookings visiting fellow), BROOKINGS, September 2014, 

JOURNAL, 	Dec. 	28, 	2014, 	retrieved 	April 	10, 	2015 	from 	retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/research/files/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/research/files/]

http://www.wsj.com/articles/charles-boustany-and-robert-b-zoellick-a-trade-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.wsj.com/articles/charles-boustany-and-robert-b-zoellick-a-trade-]
opportunity-for-obama-and-the-new-congress-1419811308. Third, U.S. foreign policy has been drifting. President Obama's disengagements, have eroded confidence in America's staying power. Trade policy can help re-establish America's 
international economic commitment; U.S. economic interests underpin political and 
security ties. New economic links with key security partners on the Pacific and Atlantic rims of the Eurasian continents advance our primary geopolitical interests. And trade policy enlists America's greatest asset -- its dynamic private sector -- in support of U.S. foreign policy. 
1746. Michael Froman, (U.S. Trade representative), FOREIGN POLICY, Feb. 17, 
2015 retrieved April 10, 2015 from https://foreignpolicy.com/2015/02/17/the- geopolitical-stakes-of-americas-trade-policy-tpp-ttip/. We face an important choice. We can lead and ensure that the global trading system reflects our values and our 
interests, or we can cede that role to others, which will inevitably create a less 
advantageous position for our workers and our businesses. The economic implications are stark, but so too are the strategic ones. Sitting on the sidelines, we'll see our partnerships weakened as they're deprived of the strength that comes from enhanced economic relationships, and we'll miss the opportunity to forge new habits of cooperation among key partners. We cannot allow that to happen. As economic power has become more consequential in world affairs, so too has American leadership on trade. If the United States leads on trade, it can strengthen the rules- based order. For over seven decades, American leadership of the global trading 
system has helped bring jobs to our shores, partners to our defense, and peace and 
prosperity to those around the world who have embraced openness and fairness. 
Economically and strategically, that leadership is now more important than ever. 
1747. Robert B. Zoellick, (former World Bank president), WALL STREET 
JOURNAL, Dec. 28, 2014, retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://www.wsj.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.wsj.com/]
articles/charles-boustany-and-robert-b-zoellick-a-trade-opportunity-for-obama-and- 
the-new-congress-1419811308. Second, the U.S. and world economies desperately need a shift from extraordinary governmental spending and zero-interest-rate monetary policies to growth led by the private sector. Sustained growth can only be generated by private investment, innovation and purchases. American companies 
need greater confidence in free-enterprise policies before investing their big cash 
reserves. Trade policy offers an international partnership to overcome structural impediments to growth. The negotiations for the TPP, for example, aim to create an open trade and investment network among the U.S., six current FTA partners, and five new ones. The biggest additional market is Japan, a pivotal Pacific ally. Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe wants to use the TPP to press his own economy toward more competition, without which his goal of reviving Japan will falter. Vietnam and Malaysia would also take part; they believe they can use the rules and disciplines of the TPP to boost growth, improve industries and services, expand global linkages, 
and avoid the so-called --middle income‖ trap, where countries' lack of productivity 
growth slows the rise to higher incomes. 
1748. Michael E. O'Hanlon, (Brookings Foreign Policy research director), 
papers/2014/09/why trade matters/trade global views_final.pdf. It is tempting to focus 
solely on these pressing problems and defer less urgent issues -- such as forging new disciplines for international trade -- to another day, especially when such issues pose challenges of their own. But that would be a mistake. A key motivation in building greater domestic and international consensus for advancing trade liberalization now is precisely the role that greater economic integration can play in opening up new avenues of opportunity for promoting development and increasing economic prosperity. Such initiatives can help stabilize key regions and strengthen the security of the United States and its partners. The last century provides a powerful example of how expanding trade relations can help reduce global tensions and raise living standards. Following World War II, building stronger economic cooperation was a centerpiece of allied efforts to erase battle scars and embrace former enemies. In defeat, the economies of Germany, Italy and Japan faced ruin and people were on the verge of starvation. The United States led efforts to rebuild Europe and to repair 
Japan's economy. A key element of the Marshall Plan, which established the 
foundation for unprecedented growth and the level of European integration that exists today, was to revive trade by reducing tariffs. Russia, and the eastern part of Europe that it controlled, refused to participate or receive such assistance. Decades later, as the Cold War ended, the United States and Western Europe sought to make up for lost time by providing significant technical and financial assistance to help integrate central and eastern European countries with the rest of Europe and the global economy. 
1751. Peter Allgeier, (Coalition of Services Industries president), THE HILL, Feb. 
12, 2015 retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://thehill.com/blogs/congress-  [HYPERLINK: http://thehill.com/blogs/congress-]
blog/economy-budget/232549-services-r-us. An ambitious international services 
agreement with 21st century rules would be one of the most important economic contributions of this century. However, the prospects for a multilateral services agreement in the WTO (GATS 2.0) in the immediate future are nil. Our best alternative is to obtain coherent, up-to-date rules and market access commitments across a range of agreements - -the plurilateral Trade in Services Agreement (TiSA) in Geneva and the relevant chapters in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP). Congressional passage of Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) with clear support for strong services outcomes in 
all of these negotiations would give American service providers and their workers the 
opportunities to excel in global markets, and ultimately would provide the template for a new multilateral framework for international trade in services. 
1752. Washington Post Editorial Board, Feb. 4, 2015 retrieved April 10, 2015 from 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/critics-concerns-about-the-trans-pacific-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/critics-concerns-about-the-trans-pacific-]
partnership-are-overblown/2015/02/04/91dd4df2-abdc-11e4-9c91- 
e9d2f9fde644_story.html. The United States, and the world, desperately needs medical innovation, but the difficult fact is that it costs money  --  billions of dollars sometimes  --  to develop effective new drugs. One way to incentivize that investment 
is to offer companies a temporary government-guaranteed monopoly on commercial 
exploitation of their discoveries. Obviously, there's a trade-off: Drug prices must be high enough to encourage risk-taking but not so high as to limit access or bankrupt 

BROOKINGS, 	July 	10, 	2012, 	retrieved 	April 	10, 	2015 	from 	insurance systems. The United States, which accounts for 4.5 percent of the world's 

http://www.brookings.edu/research/opinions/2012/07/10-economy-foreign-policy-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.brookings.edu/research/opinions/2012/07/10-economy-foreign-policy-]
lieberthal-ohanlon, Lastly, American economic weakness undercuts U.S. leadership abroad. Other countries sense our weakness and wonder about our purport 7ed decline. If this perception becomes more widespread, and the case that we are in decline becomes more persuasive, countries will begin to take actions that reflect 
their skepticism about America's future. Allies and friends will doubt our 
commitment and may pursue nuclear weapons for their own security, for example; adversaries will sense opportunity and be less restrained in throwing around their weight in their own neighborhoods. The crucial Persian Gulf and Western Pacific regions will likely become less stable. Major war will become more likely. When running for president last time, Obama eloquently articulated big foreign policy visions: healing America's breach with the Muslim world, controlling global climate change, dramatically curbing global poverty through development aid, moving toward a world free of nuclear weapons. These were, and remain, worthy if elusive 
goals. However, for Obama or his successor, there is now a much more urgent big- 
picture issue: restoring U.S. economic strength. Nothing else is really possible if that fundamental prerequisite to effective foreign policy is not reestablished. 
population but 39 percent of global spending on pharmaceuticals, probably subsidizes health systems in Europe and elsewhere. The robust intellectual-property rights and relatively higher prices U.S. drug firms enjoy in their domestic market enable them to sell medicine in price-controlled markets abroad. No doubt that system is imperfect, but the TPP is best understood as a realistic effort to make it work better. 
1753. Eric Schinfeld, (Washington Council on International Trade president), 
HERALD NET, Oct. 18, 2014, retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://www.heraldnet.com/article/20141018/OPINION03/141019045. Part [HYPERLINK: http://www.heraldnet.com/article/20141018/OPINION03/141019045] of what makes this costly process economically feasible are the 12 years of data protection that firms receive once a drug is released. During this period, competitors can't use the innovator company's research to create knock-off biologics. As a result, the firm responsible for the new biologic can recoup its investment. If biotech innovators don't enjoy the same data protections in Trans-Pacific Partnership countries as in the United States, few companies may take on the risk of developing new biologics, impeding medical research. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	13 8 
 
 
 
1754. Daniel A. Sepulveda, (Deputy Assistant Secretary of State), STATE DEPARTMENT, Feb. 11, 2015 retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://www.state.gov/e/eb/rls/rm/2015/237436.htm. As [HYPERLINK: http://www.state.gov/e/eb/rls/rm/2015/237436.htm] the number of Internet users worldwide has ballooned from 2 to 3 billion, the increase in Internet use creates significant economic potential. The Obama Administration is working to unlock the promise of e-commerce, keep the Internet free and open, promote competitive access for telecommunications suppliers, and set digital trade rules-of-the-road by negotiating new trade agreements. Trade Promotion Authority legislation and the pending trade agreements we expect Congress to consider over the coming months and years will provide that kind of protection. These agreements aim to ensure that the free flow of information and data are the default setting for nations. This will preserve the architecture that has empowered the Internet and global communications to fuel economic growth at home and abroad. It is in our interest, across parties and ideology, to ensure we move forward and approve TPA and the pending agreements for many reasons, but promoting the preservation and growth of global communications and the open Internet is one of the strongest. 
1755. Matthew Goodman, (CSIS political economy chair), CSIS, Nov 13, 2013, 


1761. Bonnie Glaser, (CSIS China Studies chair), CSIS, Jan. 14, 2014 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/attachments/ts140114_glaser.pdf. The [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/attachments/ts140114_glaser.pdf] dispute over territory and maritime jurisdiction is a major source of rising tensions and instability as regional nations take tit-for-tat measures to assert their claims. The risk of a clash, with the attendant potential for escalation, is highest between China and Japan in the East China Sea. The US could become entangled in such a Sino-Japanese conflict as 
a result of its obligations under the US-Japan Mutual Security Treaty to defend 
territories under Japanese administrative control. China's recent declaration of an East China Sea air defense identification zone (ADIZ) that overlaps substantially with Japan's ADIZ and covers the disputed islands significantly increases the risk of accidents and miscalculation. 
1762. Bonnie Glaser, (CSIS China Studies chair), CSIS, Jan. 14, 2014 retrieved April 
19, 2015 from http://csis.org/files/attachments/ts140114_glaser.pdf. Fifth, [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/attachments/ts140114_glaser.pdf] Congress should enact trade promotion authority legislation so that the Administration can persuade the other countries negotiating the TPP that the US will be able to not just 
sign, but also ratify a high-standard TPP agreement. Maintaining American economic 
leadership in the Asia-Pacific is imperative to enhancing the US ability to achieve its 

retrieved 	April 19, 2015 	from 	http://csis.org/files/publication/131113_  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publication/131113_]	other interests, including the promotion of a rules-based system and the peaceful 

Conversation2_TTP.pdf. The TPP is far and away the most significant new element of a longstanding U.S. strategy of engagement in the Asia-Pacific region. In addition to the economic benefits of more open trade and investment and updated rules of the road, a successful TPP will more firmly anchor the United States in a region that is 
critical to our future security and prosperity. The TPP is already changing the 
conversation about regional integration in Asia, as even nonparticipants realize the importance of striving for higher standards in their trade and investment arrangements. 
1756. Ernest Bower, (CSIS Southeast Asia Studies chair), CSIS, Nov 13, 2013, 
settlement of maritime disputes. 
1763. Scott Neuman, (Digital News editor and Pulitzer Prize winner), NPR, Nov. 16, 
2012 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.npr.org/2012/11/16/165302731/why-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.npr.org/2012/11/16/165302731/why-]obama-put-asia-on-the-agenda-now. Among other things, providing a counterbalance to China means strengthening military ties and commitments in the region. Earlier this year, Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta said the U.S. would increase the number 
and size of its military exercises in the Pacific. By 2020, he said, the U.S. Navy 
would shift the bulk of its fleet to the Pacific, including six carrier battle groups. But in a larger diplomatic sense, the goal is to rein in Beijing and promote regional 

retrieved 	April 19, 2015 	from 	http://csis.org/files/publication/131113_  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/files/publication/131113_]	stability without provoking the ire of a resurgent China, which sees itself as the 

Conversation2_TTP.pdf. The TPP is significant because it is an Asia-driven conceptualization of the need for high-standard rules to promote economic integration, trade, and investment. It is important to remember that the United States 
joined a preexisting negotiation, so this is not a --U.S. initiative.‖ If successful, a 
strong TPP agreement sets a credible standard for establishing trans-border rule of law for trade and investment in the world's largest and fastest growing regional economies. For the United States, the TPP represents its primary tactic in implementing a strategy to promote regional peace and prosperity through economic engagement, in effect rebalancing the Asia --pivot,‖ which was interpreted by many in the region to be dominated initially by security concerns. U.S. membership in the TPP says that the United States recognizes that strong economic engagement is foundationally necessary for a sustainable and longterm security strategy in the Indo- 
Pacific. 
1757. Scott Miller, (CSIS international business senior advisor), CSIS, Dec. 10, 2013 
retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://csis.org/publication/trans-pacific-partnership-  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/publication/trans-pacific-partnership-]trade-ministers-meeting. Q3: How important is TPP to the Obama administration's strategy of --rebalancing‖ to Asia, and what happens if it fails? A3: TPP is at the heart of the rebalancing strategy, which is a multifaceted effort to highlight and reinforce the United States' enduring interests in the critical Asia-Pacific region. In addition to its economic benefits of expanded growth and jobs, a TPP agreement would more firmly anchor the United States in the region and underscore U.S. leadership as a Pacific power. Asians are looking to the United States not only to uphold peace and 
security in the region through its strong military presence, but also to promote shared 
prosperity through deeper trade and investment ties. 
1758. Scott Miller, (CSIS international business senior advisor), CSIS, Dec. 10, 2013 
retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://csis.org/publication/trans-pacific-partnership-  [HYPERLINK: http://csis.org/publication/trans-pacific-partnership-]trade-ministers-meeting. A modest delay in concluding the TPP negotiations beyond the end of 2013 is not fatal, but failure to reach an eventual deal would be a serious blow to the rebalancing strategy. Beyond the lost economic opportunities, lack of a TPP agreement would feed perceptions in Asia that the rebalance is mainly about military positioning. It would also raise questions about the U.S. ability to champion 
the rules of the road in economic affairs. For these reasons, it is likely that the 
administration will redouble its efforts to conclude a successful TPP agreement in the first half of 2014 and to spend an increasing amount of political capital trying to win congressional approval of TPA and TPP itself. 
1759. Andrew Stein, (Foreign Policy Imitative new York fellow), THE DIPLOMAT, 
Aug. 6, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://thediplomat.com/2013/08/the-tpp-  [HYPERLINK: http://thediplomat.com/2013/08/the-tpp-]abenomics-and-americas-asia-pivot/?allpages=yes. Japan's entrance into the Trans- Pacific Partnership free-trade treaty negotiations is arguably the most important event in U.S. relations with the Asia-Pacific in the last decade. This is because the 
sustainability of long-term American strategic power in Asia and Prime Minister 
Shinzo Abe's attempts to resuscitate the Japanese economy are entirely co-dependent. Without an economically resurgent Japan, Asia will be increasingly sucked away from the U.S. and into the Chinese economic and strategic orbit. Washington's Asia pivot is not complete without a Japan-powered TPP, which both supports its growing Asia-Pacific political and security alliance and acts as an economic containment treaty against China. 
1760. Phillip Swagel, (Maryland public policy professor), AMERICAN 
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE, Jan. 16, 2014, retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
http://www.aei.org/article/economics/three-ways-we-can-improve-the-economy-in-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.aei.org/article/economics/three-ways-we-can-improve-the-economy-in-]
2014/. Completion of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) would strengthen economic growth in the United States and in our allies. Crucially, TPP would involve market- opening reforms in Japan that both help U.S. exports and further Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's agenda to propel his country out of a decades-long stagnation. This would have security benefits in addition to the economic ones, since a more prosperous Japan would be a more confident partner in standing up to China's aggressive regional actions. Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) is likely a prerequisite for completing the TPP, since other countries will hesitate to sign on to an agreement that can be amended by Congress. The dilemma is that TPA will go forward only if 
the White House makes a full-fledged effort to garner support from Congressional 
allies, but the President is hesitating until he believes that the effort will succeed. TPA looks to be the biggest potential economic accomplishment in Mr. Obama's second term - he must surely realize that and eventually will make the plunge to push it forward. 
logical lead power in Asia. This so-called pivot to Asia has been in motion since the 
first days of the Obama administration, said John Ciorciari of the University of Michigan's Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy. --President Obama . . . sees this as a foreign policy legacy for his administration. It speaks to the big role that the U.S. 
sees for itself in Asia, which is to be there for the long term.‖ [ellipsis in original] 
1764. Scott Neuman, (Digital News editor and Pulitzer Prize winner), NPR, Nov. 16, 
2012 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.npr.org/2012/11/16/165302731/why-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.npr.org/2012/11/16/165302731/why-]
obama-put-asia-on-the-agenda-now. Dean Cheng, a research fellow at the Heritage Foundation's Asia Studies Center, says Asia is important because it could easily become a region of major instability. --You have multiple nuclear powers: China, Russia, North Korea,‖ he says. --So, with any outbreak of hostilities, given the economic importance of the region, it will inevitably affect the American economy and the global economy.‖ How does Southeast Asia fit into the grand strategy? --Throughout the region, you have small countries that have relatively robust ties to China, but as small powers, they don't want to be too beholden to their great neighbor 
to the north,‖ Ciorciari says. --The president's trip, I think, is a very conscious attempt 
to take advantage of that opportunity to build its relationships.‖ 
1765. Michael E. Brown, (GWU Elliott School of International Affairs dean), 
WASHINGTON POST, Feb. 6, 2015, retrieved April 10, 2015 from 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2015/02/06/trade-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2015/02/06/trade-]
partnerships-are-an-opportunity-not-to-be-missed/. Second, turning to the Pacific, the rise of China is the great balance of power challenge of our time. The TPP isn't a Pacific panacea, but it is an important part of the equation. It would reinforce the United States' position in the region and provide strategic reassurance to the many 
Asia-Pacific countries that worry about China's rise - that is, everyone except North 
Korea. It would be a new, strong multilateral accord in a region that very much needs more multilateral frameworks. These would be stability-enhancing developments. 
1766. Aaron Friedberg, (Princeton international affairs professor), AMERICAN 
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE, Oct. 26, 2014 retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://www.aei.org/publication/eye-asia/. Compared [HYPERLINK: http://www.aei.org/publication/eye-asia/] to Europe, Asia has weak international organizations and means of resolving disputes. Moreover, it contains different types of states  --  from liberal democracies to authoritarian regimes of various stripes and repressive totalitarian dictatorships  --  with myriad outstanding 
differences over borders and maritime claims. Asia is also a region in which the 
domestic politics of many significant players are characterized by strident forms of nationalism. For these reasons, Asia is one region of the world where conflicts among major powers remain plausible and may even be probable. It is also a region where the United States has substantial economic interests, strong alliance commitments, quasi-alliance relationships, and a continuing interest in preserving freedom of navigation across the Western Pacific. 
1767. Andrew Browne, (Wall Street Journal senior correspondent), WALL STREET 
JOURNAL, Jan. 21, 2014 retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://www.wsj.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.wsj.com/]articles/SB10001424052702304149404579322313632737716. What happens next? 
The future will be shaped in part by the success or otherwise of economic reform in 
both countries. Mr. Abe's plan is filled with peril. In trying to lift growth, he has so far delivered mainly currency devaluation and fiscal spending. This has been aided by hyper-aggressive monetary easing and the worry is that the push to lift inflation will add to the burden of financing Japan's already staggeringly high public debt. Mr. Xi is moving in the opposite direction. His goal is to slow Chinese growth rates in an orderly way by tempering investment and drawing down debt, putting the economy on a more sustainable path driven by consumption. One risk is that the air will come out of debt and real-estate bubbles too quickly, stalling the country's advance. It's 
also far from clear how heated competition between China and Japan can be 
contained in a region that has been so preoccupied with building prosperity it neglected the architecture of security. Asia has no institutional arrangements for mediating disputes among states. Japan and China have no hotline; bilateral summitry is dead, at least for now. So far, the political and diplomatic tensions haven't done too much damage to business. During an earlier bout of tensions, China choked off exports to Japan of rare earths vital to high-technology products like magnets. That spread alarm through Japanese industry. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	13 9 
 
 
 
1768. Andrew Stein, (Foreign Policy Imitative new York fellow), THE DIPLOMAT, Aug. 6, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://thediplomat.com/2013/08/the-tpp-  [HYPERLINK: http://thediplomat.com/2013/08/the-tpp-]abenomics-and-americas-asia-pivot/?allpages=yes. The failure of Abenomics, including the structural reforms driven by Japanese TPP negotiations, may pose severe global stability risks. If Abe fails at home, structural reforms will stall and with these, any hope for a Japanese recovery. There are two worrying scenarios - both bad for Japan and its friends. First, without reform implementation, Abe's massive monetary easing program combined with aggressive deficit stimulus may lead to stagflation, a terrible mix of high inflation, stunted growth and rising unemployment. Second, given Japan's enormous debt burden at 230% of GDP, a mere 2% increase in interest rates on Japanese Government Bonds will lift debt service costs to 100% of the government budget. This scenario is a real possibility given Japan's persistent trade deficits and sluggish growth. In the worst case this may lead to a run on Japanese bonds - as they lose their safe haven status for foreign investors, with declining numbers of Japanese savers to pick up the slack. Either of these scenarios would edge Japan towards default with massive global ramifications that would dwarf the Eurozone crisis, let alone trashing the TPP negotiations. Worst of all, an economically desperate Japan would likely turn inwards with virulent nationalism, while ironically falling deeper into the arms of China, wrecking America's Asia strategy. 
1769. Rob Bailer, (Royal Institute for International Affairs), MARKETPLACE, July 
20, 2012, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.marketplace.org/topics/world/us-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.marketplace.org/topics/world/us-]drought-could-have-global-impact-food-prices. Bailey: Well America is an agricultural superpower as well as a traditional global superpower, so it's the biggest producer of maize in the world, it's the biggest producer of soy beans in the world. So as soon as there's a decrease in U.S. agricultural production, that has massive effects 
for the global economy. These sorts of price impacts could ripple across economies 
across borders. Horwich: And geopolitically, let's just think back a few years when food prices start to rocket in some parts of the world, crazy things can happen. Bailey: Absolutely, if you think back to 2008 in Haiti the government actually fell as a result of riots connected to food prices. Fast forward a couple more years to 2011, the Arab Spring actually was sparked by initial protests in a number of countries about the price of bread because the price of wheat had gone up in response to export bans following a really bad harvest in Russia and Ukraine after a heat wave and wild fires there. Horwich: Are there any particular flash points that you are looking at this 
time around? Bailey: The situation in the Middle East remains much the same, there 
is still huge political vulnerability to a spike in wheat prices. The other thing that the 
U.S. is having a big impact on is soy bean prices. But if we see a very sharp increase 
soy bean prices, you can expect meat prices to rise and this could actually have implications for China, quite seriously. 
1770. Michael Klare, (Hampshire College world security studies professor), HIGH 
BROWN MAGAZINE, Aug. 9, 2012, retrieved April 19, 2015 from 
http://www.highbrowmagazine.com/1459-food-prices-rise-dangers-potential-social-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.highbrowmagazine.com/1459-food-prices-rise-dangers-potential-social-]
unrest-seem-imminent. --What happens to the U.S. supply has immense impact 
around the world,‖ says Robert Thompson, a food expert at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs. As the crops most affected by the drought, corn and soybeans, disappear from world markets, he noted, the price of all grains, including wheat, is likely to soar, causing immense hardship to those who already have trouble affording enough food to feed their families. The Hunger Games, 2007-2011 What happens next is, of course, impossible to predict, but if the recent past is any guide, it could turn ugly. In 2007-2008, when rice, corn, and wheat experienced prices hikes of 100 percent or more, sharply higher prices - especially for bread - sparked --food riots‖ in more than two dozen countries, including Bangladesh, Cameroon, Egypt, Haiti, 
Indonesia, Senegal, and Yemen. In Haiti, the rioting became so violent and public 
confidence in the government's ability to address the problem dropped so precipitously that the Haitian Senate voted to oust the country's prime minister, Jacques-Édouard Alexis. In other countries, angry protestors clashed with army and police forces, leaving scores dead. 
1771. Loren Mooney, (Stanford Graduate School of Business online editor), 
STANFORD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS, May 28, 2014 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.gsb.stanford.edu/insights/matthew-o-jackson-can-trade-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.gsb.stanford.edu/insights/matthew-o-jackson-can-trade-]prevent-war. How can humans stop war? Obviously there's no simple answer, but a new network model analysis of international alliances suggests that trade may be at least part of the answer. The model, developed by Stanford economist Matthew O. Jackson and economics Ph.D. candidate Stephen Nei, suggests that military alliances alone aren't enough to stop nations from attacking one other, and also that the addition of multilateral economic trade creates a more stable, peaceful world. While there is considerable existing research on the effects of trade and war, much of it has looked at bilateral relationships. This model focuses on multilateral interactions and considers various incentives for countries to attack, form alliances with, and trade with one another. In an attempt to understand what's necessary to achieve a stable network with no incentive for war, Jackson and Nei first explored an alliance scenario based solely on military defense considerations, excluding trade. --The fundamental difficulty we find is that alliances are costly to maintain if there's no economic incentive,‖ says Jackson. So networks remain relatively sparse, a condition in which even a few shifting allegiances leaves some countries vulnerable to attack. --Stability 
is not just a little bit elusive; it's very elusive.‖ 


1772. Loren Mooney, (Stanford Graduate School of Business online editor), STANFORD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS, May 28, 2014 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.gsb.stanford.edu/insights/matthew-o-jackson-can-trade-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.gsb.stanford.edu/insights/matthew-o-jackson-can-trade-]prevent-war. Economic trade, however, makes a significant difference. --Once you bring in trade, you see network structures densify,‖ he says. Nations form a web of trading alliances, which creates financial incentive not only to keep peace with trading partners, but also to protect them from being attacked so as not to disrupt trade. --In the context of the alliances we have analyzed, trade motives are essential to avoiding wars and sustaining stable networks,‖ the authors wrote in their paper, Networks of Military Alliances, Wars, and International Trade. Their findings coincide with two major global trends since World War II: From 1950 to 2000, the incidence of interstate war has decreased nearly tenfold compared with the period from 1850 to 1949. At the same time, since 1950 international trade networks have increased nearly fourfold, becoming significantly more dense. --In the period before World War II, it was hard to find a stable set of alliances,‖ says Jackson. The probability of a lasting alliance was about 60%. --You have almost a coin-flip chance that the alliance won't still be there in five years,‖ he says. In Europe in the 1870s, for example, German chancellor Otto von Bismarck sought peace with --balance of power‖ diplomacy, which crumbled leading up to World War I. --Then in the past 50 years or so, there's been a surprising global stability.‖ The impact of economic interdependence is especially apparent in Europe, Jackson says, where the Eurozone has promoted not only peace and increased trade among nations, but also labor mobility. 
1773. Richard Duncan, (former World Bank specialist), THE NEW DEPRESSION: 
THE BREAKDOWN OF THE PAPER MONEY ECONOMY, 2012, 130-131. However, in this disaster scenario, it is not certain that China would survive in its current configuration. Its economy would be in ruins. Most of its factories and banks would be closed. Unemployment could exceed 30 percent. There would most likely be starvation both in the cities and in the countryside. The Communist Party could lose its grip on power, in which case the country could break apart, as it has numerous times in the past. It was less than 100 years ago that China's provinces, ruled by warlords, were at war with one another. United or divided, China's nuclear arsenal would make it Asia's undisputed superpower if the United States were to withdraw from the region. From Korea and Japan in the North to New Zealand in the South to Burma in the West, all of Asia would be at China's mercy. And hunger among China's population of 1.3 billion people could necessitate territorial expansion into Southeast Asia. In fact, the central government might not be able to prevent mass migration southward, even if it wanted to. 
1774. Richard Duncan, (former World Bank specialist), THE NEW DEPRESSION: 
THE BREAKDOWN OF THE PAPER MONEY ECONOMY, 2012, 131. The extent to which Russia would menace its European neighbors is unclear. On the one hand, Russia would be impoverished by the collapse in oil prices and might be too preoccupied with internal unrest to threaten anyone. On the other hand, it could provoke a war with the goal of maintaining internal order through emergency wartime powers. Germany is very nearly demilitarized today when compared with the late 1930s. Lacking a nuclear deterrent of its own, it could be subject to Russian intimidation. While Germany could appeal for protection from England and France, who do have nuclear capabilities, it is uncertain that would buy Germany enough time to remilitarize before it became a victim of Eastern aggression. 
1775. Richard Duncan, (former World Bank specialist), THE NEW DEPRESSION: 
THE BREAKDOWN OF THE PAPER MONEY ECONOMY, 2012, 131-2. As for the rest of the world, its prospects in this disaster scenario can be summed up in only a couple of sentences. Global economic output could fall by as much as half, from $60 trillion to $30 trillion. Not all of the world's seven billion people would survive in a $30 trillion global economy. Starvation would be widespread. Food riots would provoke political upheaval and myriad big and small conflicts around the world. It would be a humanitarian catastrophe so extreme as to be unimaginable for the current generation, who, at least in the industrialized world, has known only prosperity. Nor would there be reason to hope that the New Great Depression would end quickly. The Great Depression was only ended by an even more calamitous global war that killed approximately 60 million people. 
1776. Zbigniew Brzezinski, (John Hopkins American Foreign Policy professor), 
STRATEGIC VISION: AMERICA AND THE CRISIS OF GLOBAL POWER, 2012, 114. An American decline would impact the nuclear domain most profoundly by inciting a crisis of confidence in the credibility of the American nuclear umbrella. Countries like South Korea, Taiwan, Japan, Turkey, and even Israel, among others, rely on the United States' extended nuclear deterrence for security. If they were to see the United States slowly retreat from certain regions, forced by circumstances to pull back its guarantees, or even if they were to lose confidence in standing US guarantees, because of the financial, political, military, and diplomatic consequences of an American decline, then they will have to seek security elsewhere. That --elsewhere‖ security could originate from only two sources: from nuclear weapons of one's own or from the extended deterrence of another power -- most likely Russia, China, or India. 
1777. Zbigniew Brzezinski, (John Hopkins American Foreign Policy professor), 
STRATEGIC VISION: AMERICA AND THE CRISIS OF GLOBAL POWER, 2012, 114-5. Last but not least, even though China and India today maintain a responsible nuclear posture of minimal deterrence and --no first use,‖ the uncertainty of an increasingly nuclear world could force both states to reevaluate and escalate their nuclear posture. Indeed, they as well as Russia might even become inclined to extend nuclear assurances to their respective client states. Not only could this signal a renewed regional nuclear arms race between these three aspiring powers but it could also create new and antagonistic spheres of influence in Eurasia driven by competitive nuclear deterrence. 
1778. Zbigniew Brzezinski, (John Hopkins American Foreign Policy professor), 
STRATEGIC VISION: AMERICA AND THE CRISIS OF GLOBAL POWER, 2012, 115. The decline of the United States would thus precipitate drastic changes to the nuclear domain. An increase in proliferation among insecure American allies and/or an arms race between the emerging Asian powers are among the more likely outcomes. This ripple effect of proliferation would undermine the transparent management of the nuclear domain and increase the likelihood of interstate rivalry, miscalculation, and eventually even perhaps of international nuclear terror. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	14 0 
 
 
 
1779. Zbigniew Brzezinski, (John Hopkins American Foreign Policy professor), STRATEGIC VISION: AMERICA AND THE CRISIS OF GLOBAL POWER, 2012, 115. In addition to the foregoing, in the course of this century the world will face a series of novel geopolitical challenges brought about by significant changes in the physical environment. The management of those changing environmental commons -- the growing scarcity of fresh water, the opening of the Arctic, and global warming -- will require global consensus and mutual sacrifice. American leadership alone is not enough to secure cooperation on all these issues, but a decline in American influence would reduce the likelihood of achieving cooperative agreements on environmental and resource management. America's retirement from its role of global policeman could create greater opportunities for emerging powers to further exploit the environmental commons for their own economic gain, increasing the chances of resource-driven conflict, particularly in Asia. 
1780. Zbigniew Brzezinski, (John Hopkins American Foreign Policy professor), 
STRATEGIC VISION: AMERICA AND THE CRISIS OF GLOBAL POWER, 2012, 119. Only a vigorous Unites States could lead on climate change, given Russia's dependence on carbon-based energies for economic growth, India's relatively low emissions rate, and China's current reluctance to assume global responsibility. The protection and good faith management of the global commons --  sea, space, cyberspace, nuclear proliferation, water security, the Arctic, and the environment itself -- are imperative to the long-term growth of the global economy and the continuation of basic geopolitical stability. But in almost every case, the potential absence of constructive and influential US leadership would fatally undermine the essential communality of the global commons. The argument that America's decline would generate global insecurity, endanger some vulnerable states, produce a more troubled North American neighborhood, and make cooperative management of the global commons more difficult is not an argument for US global supremacy. In fact, the strategic complexities of the world in the twenty-first century -- resulting from the rise of a politically self-assertive global population and from the dispersal of global power -- make such supremacy unattainable. But in this increasingly complicated geopolitical environment, an America in pursuit of a new, timely strategic vision is crucial to helping the world avoid a dangerous slide into international turmoil. 
1781. Emily Parker, (New America Foundation senior fellow), FOREIGN POLICY, 
Sept. 24, 2014 retrieved April 20, 2015 from http://www.foreignpolicy.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.foreignpolicy.com/]


1785. Cheryl Kemp, (WHIR content director), WHIR, Sept. 26, 2014 retrieved April 20, 2015 from http://www.thewhir.com/web-hosting-news/russian-lockdown-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.thewhir.com/web-hosting-news/russian-lockdown-]internet-continues-strict-data-storage-regulations. The latest law to keep data in 
Russia has been postured by the government as protection against spying, hacking 
and threats from the Ukraine crisis. However, as a country with state controlled 
media, new restrictions on internet and blogging and a new law coming to limit foreign companies interest in Russian media firms to 20 percent, it seems to some like an even greater effort to censor and cut Russia off from the rest of the world. It's 
obvious that foreign companies don't have nearly enough time to build data centers in 
Russia before this law goes into effect. --But if a company wants to operate on the territory of the Russian Federation, there are a wide range of rental opportunities,‖ 
Alexander Yushchenko, a Communist Party deputy in the Duma and co-author of the 
bill, said this month. Yushchenko said foreign Internet firms could rent storage from Russian companies such as state-controlled telecom provider OAO Rostelecom. One might suspect the offer to rent is yet just another way Russia can attempt to control 
data and continue moving towards greater censorship. 
1786. Dan Virgillito, (WIRED free lance writer), VPN CREATIVE, Oct. 16, 2014 
retrieved April 20, 2015 from https://vpncreative.net/2014/10/16/study-major- portion-russia-supports-internet-censorship/. Russia is continuing to expand its online capabilities and protect its information in a field it considers to be dominated by the United States. The bill on retaining user data follows a particular law enacted in February that provides Roskomnadzor, Russia's communications regulator, the power 
to block websites deemed a threat to public order, without court notice. When it 
comes to access to foreign services, Russians may soon be without the most popular social networks and services as relocating servers to Russia may not be a worthwhile investment for many foreign companies. 
1787. Tom Risen, (US News technology reporter), US NEWS AND WORLD 
REPORT, May 30, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.usnews.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.usnews.com/]
news/articles/2014/05/30/hassan-rouhani-youtube-and-irans-dubious-internet- 
revolution. It's getting harder for people to use proxy servers,‖ Kelly says. --The authorities are better able to recognize international traffic compared with domestic 
traffic.‖ While Rouhani's overtures on the Internet make him sound like a reformer, 
he has so far not slowed his country's cultural repression. His speeches and statements are likely public relations ploys to avoid stricter economic sanctions from Western nations, says Robert Charles, a former assistant secretary of state who served 

articles/2014/09/24/putin_cyberphobia_russia_internet_media. 	The 	Internet 	during the George W. Bush administration. Iran killed more than 369 people in 

crackdown is part of a larger attempt to rein in the media. Oleg Kashin, a well-known blogger and journalist, told me, --Putin began with television, then he moved on to newspapers; after [the 2011 protest at] Bolotnaya he purged whatever was left of the 
independent media.‖ Kashin adds that now only social networks remain, but even that 
pool is getting smaller. VKontakte, Russia's version of Facebook, has been essentially taken over by Kremlin allies. Kashin said, --Facebook and Twitter are the only ones they have no control over. It is just a matter of time before they are dealt with as well.‖ Reining in the web has been a way for the Kremlin to help ensure that alternative voices don't undermine the official narrative about Ukraine featured on state-controlled television. As we've seen in China, however, censorship will not be completely effective. Some Russians will also find ways to evade state controls. The number of Russians using Tor, software that helps users protect themselves from 
surveillance, has multiplied considerably since last year. Elia Kabanov, the author of 
the Moscow-based blog Metkere, told me, --I'm looking forward to new censorship 
laws and I'm sure we'll find a way to ignore them.‖ 
1782. Emily Parker, (New America Foundation senior fellow), FOREIGN POLICY, 
Sept. 24, 2014 retrieved April 20, 2015 from http://www.foreignpolicy.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.foreignpolicy.com/]articles/2014/09/24/putin_cyberphobia_russia_internet_media. But all of these factors could change, and they could change fast. Authoritarian leaders may seem to be worried about freedom of speech, but they are far more concerned about freedom of assembly. It's hardly a coincidence that Russia's Internet crackdown was sparked by 
street demonstrations. Furthermore, those protests were largely a surprise. Even a 
year earlier, anyone suggesting that demonstrations were on the horizon would have been widely mocked. In Russia's current political climate, predicting mass protests may seem equally naive. Yet while the Internet alone will not bring Russians into the 
executions last year, up from 314 in 2012, according to Amnesty International. That 
is a big number thought to be second only to China's, although Amnesty has not published figures from China since 2009 as information on executions there is considered a state secret. There are strong suspicions, says Charles, that many of the 
cases in Iran may be tied to political dissent. 
1788. Tom Risen, (US News technology reporter), US NEWS AND WORLD 
REPORT, May 30, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.usnews. 
com/news/articles/2014/05/30/hassan-rouhani-youtube-and-irans-dubious-internet- 
revolution. Even if Rouhani is motivated to liberalize the state, he might be limited by politicians fearful of the Internet's power to organize protests. He faces competition from the theocracy's supreme leader - Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who also uses Twitter - but more significantly from the Revolutionary Guard Corps and a bureaucracy full of police and censors. For example, the leader of Iran's commission that enforces online censorship laws, Abdolsamad Khoramabadi, wants to continue 
blocking Facebook access because he views it as a CIA data collection front with 
Zionist motives. It's been obvious that Rouhani's idea of the Internet also does not match the Western concept of free access to social networks and uncensored websites. He has called for Iranians to develop more software and hardware and not rely solely on imported technologies, the IRNA reports. Iran is building its own national Internet with help from the Chinese, and it could be completed by 2016, Kelly says. A government-controlled Internet could help Iran's economy by allowing access to faster networks for lower prices, but it would also increase the theocracy's ability to monitor and censor online access. 
1789. Hannah Chartoff, (CFR research associate), CENTER FOR INTERNET AND 

streets, an economic crisis could. In such an event social media would probably play 	SOCIETY, 	Aug. 	19, 	2014 	retrieved 	April 	16, 	2015 	from 

an important role. Putin seems to understand this. Furthermore, destabilizing protest movements sometimes appear to come out of the blue. In Moscow, the government survived protests. In Kiev, the government did not. 
1783. Cheryl Kemp, (WHIR content director), WHIR, Sept. 26, 2014 retrieved April 
20, 2015 from http://www.thewhir.com/web-hosting-news/russian-lockdown-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.thewhir.com/web-hosting-news/russian-lockdown-]
internet-continues-strict-data-storage-regulations. On Wednesday the Russian lower chamber of parliament passed a bill that requires internet companies to comply with a new law regarding personal data storage much sooner than anticipated, according to the Wall Street Journal. In July, Russia passed a law that all online personal data collected from Russians must by law be stored in Russia. The law was to take effect Sept. 1 2016. The deadline has been moved to January 1, 2015, just 3 months away. Under the new law, non-Russian companies will also be banned from sending a Russian citizen's personal data out of the country unless they can meet Russian government-imposed storage conditions. Earlier this year, the Russian parliament 
passed many new restrictions on the internet and blogging. --Today, the Internet is the 
last island of free expression in Russia and these draconian regulations are clearly aimed at putting it under government control,‖ Hugh Williamson, Europe and Central Asia director at Human Rights Watch, told the Wall Street Journal. 
1784. Cheryl Kemp, (WHIR content director), WHIR, Sept. 26, 2014 retrieved April 
20, 2015 from http://www.thewhir.com/web-hosting-news/russian-lockdown-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.thewhir.com/web-hosting-news/russian-lockdown-]internet-continues-strict-data-storage-regulations. --The adoption of the law will 
become a yet another step in increasing government control over the Internet in Russia, which will negatively impact the development of the industry,‖ a spokesman 
for Yandex, Russia's biggest search engine, said. Laws put in place over this year 
will have an effect on any cloud or hosting company attempting to do business with Russia. Legislation is becoming so restrictive it may even cut out the rest of the tech 
world and possibly the entire Internet. Earlier this month, the Guardian reported that 
the Kremlin is --considering radical plans to unplug Russia from the global Internet in the event of a serious military confrontation or anti-government protest at home.‖ Up 
to this point, even though the Russian print media is mostly under control of the 
government, the internet has been a place where relatively open discussion could take place. 
http://cyberlaw.stanford.edu/blog/2014/08/iran%E2%80%99s-internal-battle-internet-  [HYPERLINK: http://cyberlaw.stanford.edu/blog/2014/08/iran%E2%80%99s-internal-battle-internet-]
control-president-rouhani-and-supreme-leader-khamenei. After the moderate politician's election to the presidency in summer 2013, he signaled his intention to carry through on his promises of internet freedom by opening a Facebook account, along with his fifteen cabinet members. Yet the Committee for Determining Instances of Criminal Web Content (CDICWC), the body tasked with identifying content to be filtered, has continued to block platforms and applications such as WeChat in December 2013 and Viber -- albeit temporarily -- in January 2014. Other platforms, including Facebook, which was initially blocked in 2009, have not been made available under Rouhani's presidency. This disparity between stated policy and implementation comes at least in part from the complicated division of authority over the internet in Iran. The CDICWC is subject to the direction of the Supreme Council of Cyberspace (SCC), created in 2012 by Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, a political hardliner who does not support the liberalization of Iran's censorship policies. Although Rouhani is the chairman of the SCC, his moderate voice is often outnumbered by hardliners on the Council; of the Council's 22 current members, nine were directly appointed by Khamenei. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	14 1 
 
 
 
1790. Iran Focus News, Dec. 7, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.iranfocus.com/en/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=299  [HYPERLINK: http://www.iranfocus.com/en/index.php?option=com_content&amp;view=article&amp;id=299]62:iran-minister-says-all-web-surfers-to-be-identified&catid=5&Itemid=110. Iran's telecommunications minister has said his technicians are developing a system to identify any Internet user in the country at the moment of logging on, the ISNA news agency reported Saturday. --Because of our efforts, in the future when people want to use the Internet they will be identified, and there will be no web surfer whose identity we do not know,‖ Mahmoud Vaezi said, without elaborating on how this would technically be done. Last month, he said the Islamic republic would have --smart filtering‖ within six months to weed out Internet content the authorities deem offensive or criminal. --The first phase of smart online filtering will be ready within a month, a second phase within three months and a third within six months,‖ ISNA reported him as saying on Nov. 14. Iran formed a special Internet police unit in early 2011 to combat --cyber crimes,‖ particularly on social networking sites that are popular among the opposition and dissidents. Internet censorship is a bone of contention between conservative hardliners and government members including President Hassan Rouhani who use social networks. 
1791. Anoushiravan Ehteshami (Durham IR professor), ORIENT, 2013, retrieved 
April 16, 2015 from, http://www.sanamvakil.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.sanamvakil.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/]Orient_IV_2013.pdf In June 2013, voters may have chosen wisely, for the period before and after the confirmation of Rouhani's government has shown that he is trying to be accommodating, gradualist in implementing internal reforms, seeking consensus amongst the political elite for the critical choices to be made and 
studiously avoiding language or behavior that would antagonize the conservative 
camp. So far so good, but the trick will be how to avoid confrontation with the conservative camp (and bring them along) while avoiding alienating the masses and expectant reformist community, whose vote ultimately put Rouhani in the presidential palace. The months ahead will be crucial, as Rouhani begins to mix the dye that will set the colors of his term in office. 
1792. Dina Esfandiary, (International Institute for Strategic Studies research 
associate), NATIONAL INTEREST, Oct. 22, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from 
http://nationalinterest.org/blog/the-buzz/perfect-solution-nuclear-talks-iran-deal-  [HYPERLINK: http://nationalinterest.org/blog/the-buzz/perfect-solution-nuclear-talks-iran-deal-]
deemed-imperfect-by-11528. If there is no deal, the hardliners in Tehran will be 
strengthened. The failure of the talks will be attributed to the West and their --excessive demands.‖ Tehran will turn away from the United States and the EU towards countries that are less selective in their foreign relations, such as China and Russia. Iran will continue its often-obstructive foreign policy, because it will have little interest in contributing to Western foreign-policy goals in the region. 
1793. Huey Fern, (ABC Correspondent), ABC.NET, Feb. 6, 2015 retrieved April 14, 
2015 from http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-02-06/china-tightens-its-grip-on-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-02-06/china-tightens-its-grip-on-the-]
internet/6067990. China is tightening its grip on the internet by requiring internet users to register their real names for some internet services and disrupting the services of businesses that give people the tools to circumvent the --Great Firewall‖. According to China's internet regulator, the Cyberspace Administration of China, the new registration rule will apply to people who use services such as blogs, instant messaging services and online discussion forums. It is partially aimed at weeding out users with misleading online handles such as --Putin‖ and --People's Daily‖. 
1794. Wen-Ti Sung, (Ph.D. candidate at the Australian National University), 
ANALYTIC SERVICES INC, Feb. 19, 2014 retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.anser.org/babrief_is-xi-jinping-a-reformer. One [HYPERLINK: http://www.anser.org/babrief_is-xi-jinping-a-reformer] then returns to the original question: ought we to consider Xi Jinping a liberal reformer? Perhaps he is closet liberal. Logically, one may still hold on to the --Xi is a (closet) liberal‖ narrative by dismissing those discouraging signs as Xi's way to cover his political flank. That is to say, Xi may be protecting his liberal agenda by balancing it with authoritarian means -- to domestically --out-conservative the conservatives‖ and internationally --out-hawk the hawks.‖ Indeed, this is a possibility hinted at by Bao 
Tong, one of the most senior former officials-turned-dissidents, who suggested that 
Xi is essentially following Deng Xiaoping's path but applying Mao Zedong's style. 
1795. Hamid Panah, (San Francisco human rights attorney), POLICY MIC, Nov. 14, 
2013 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://mic.com/articles/73541/internet-censorship-  [HYPERLINK: http://mic.com/articles/73541/internet-censorship-]is-reaching-a-whole-new-level-of-creepy-in-the-middle-east. Iran is an interesting example of a more subtle approach to censorship. With a tech-savvy society in which half of the population of 75 million is connected to the Internet, the regime has sought to find ways to curb internet freedom without resorting to heavy-handed tactics of censorship. After social media was used extensively during the 2009 post-election 
uprising, the regime took a multifaceted approach to control of the Internet. The 
Iranian regime created a --cyber police‖ force in 2011 to confront anti-regime activities online. Other activists have reported the creation of fake Facebook profiles created to spy on the activities of users. Coupled with these tactics of surveillance is a plan outlined by the regime to present so-called --alternatives‖ to the internet in its current state. The regime plans to create what it has dubbed the --halal‖ Internet, which it says will be free of un-Islamic content. These methods are part of a comprehensive plan by the regime to justify censorship on political and religious grounds, going so far as to claim that using Western social media outlets will 
empower the enemies of Iran. These tactics are a sign of a more sophisticated 
approach to the issue of censorship, one which leaves room for surveillance and information-gathering on potential threats. 
1796. Hamid Panah, (San Francisco human rights attorney), POLICY MIC, Nov. 14, 
2013 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://mic.com/articles/73541/internet-censorship-  [HYPERLINK: http://mic.com/articles/73541/internet-censorship-]is-reaching-a-whole-new-level-of-creepy-in-the-middle-east. Though Iran does have a history of violent repression of bloggers and online activists, including the murder of blogger Sattar Beheshti while in police custody, the regime's new approach to censorship demonstrates the high stakes of the struggle. The goal of the cyber police 
is to project their power over the individual, demonstrate their ability to monitor 
citizens' entire lives, and ultimately silence them. Those who refuse are silenced permanently, as Beheshti found out after he was taken into custody. In some cases censorship tactics used by Gulf countries have served to galvanize protest movements and calls for free speech, but the strategy of surveillance employed by Iran appears much more dangerous. While the Gulf model of censorship focuses on incarceration of the physical body, the Iranian model seeks to frame the use of social media as an ideological battle with a foreign enemy. Institutions which can force individuals to --self-censor‖ for fear of surveillance, or being labeled a foreign collaborator, are more effective and much more difficult to overcome. This type of censorship is 
hidden but ever-present, and creates a culture of fear, mistrust, and ultimately silence. 


1797. Ilya Khrennikov, (Bloomberg News reporter), BLOOMBERG, Sept. 19, 2014 retrieved April 20, 2015 from http://origin-www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?  [HYPERLINK: http://origin-www.bloomberg.com/apps/news]pid=conewsstory&tkr=MAIL:LI&sid=a_eoYsh78H6Q. The entire global system of Internet domain names and IP addresses is managed by the Los Angeles-based Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, or ICANN. Putting a block on the worldwide Internet doesn't present technical challenges and is only a matter of 
political will, said Anton Nosik, a well-known blogger in Russia. --It's clear that 
moving Russia onto a North Korean model of Internet management will have far- reaching consequences for the economy,‖ he said on his blog. --But the overall trend of the government seeking to restrict the exchange of information and access to the Web is clear.‖ Internet Crackdown Russia last month banned anonymous access to the Internet in public spaces and expanded the regulation of media to the blogosphere, requiring those with at least 3,000 daily readers to register their real names and contact information. In February the authorities had passed a law allowing them to 
close webpages without a court decision if material is deemed --extremist.‖ 
1798. Ilya Khrennikov, (Bloomberg News reporter), BLOOMBERG, Sept. 19, 2014 
retrieved April 20, 2015 from http://origin-www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?  [HYPERLINK: http://origin-www.bloomberg.com/apps/news]pid=conewsstory&tkr=MAIL:LI&sid=a_eoYsh78H6Q. Russian opposition leader Alexey Navalny, who used to criticize Putin and reveal corruption among his inner circle, was the first victim of that law when his blog on LiveJournal.com was shut in March. Recent legislation requires Internet companies to store Russian users' information on servers in the country, similar to Chinese regulations. Google Inc. Chairman Eric Schmidt said last year, as the changes were being proposed, that Russia was --on the path‖ toward China's model of Internet censorship. --Russia is 
isolating itself and securing itself from the West,‖ said Masha Lipman, an 
independent Moscow-based political analyst. --Putin throughout almost all of his 15 years of rule has made control over societal forces a priority. It's only natural that his concern is even higher now with the Western sanctions and a deteriorating economy.‖ 
1799. Peter Nguyen, (Hotspot Shield writer), HOTSPOT SHIELD, Oct. 9, 2014 
retrieved April 20, 2015 from http://blog.hotspotshield.com/2014/10/09/russian-  [HYPERLINK: http://blog.hotspotshield.com/2014/10/09/russian-]internet-censorship-helps-keep-putin-power/. When Vladimir Putin first became the Prime Minister of Russia in 1999, approximately 2 million members of his public had access to the Internet. Fast-forward 15 years: Putin is now the country's president, and nearly half of Russia's 144 million people have access to the web. At first glance, 
that statistic seems impressive. Russia's Internet use has indeed grown during the last 
decade and a half. When you consider the fact that about 85 percent of the 319 million people in the U.S. habitually use the Web, however, it becomes clear that Russia is lagging behind the times. The reason for this could have a lot to do with Putin, a world leader who has dubbed the Internet a --CIA project‖ with secret intentions to harm Russia. 
1800. Peter Nguyen, (Hotspot Shield writer), HOTSPOT SHIELD, Oct. 9, 2014 
retrieved April 20, 2015 from http://blog.hotspotshield.com/2014/10/09/russian-  [HYPERLINK: http://blog.hotspotshield.com/2014/10/09/russian-]internet-censorship-helps-keep-putin-power/. Formerly --Free‖ Russian Writers 
Silenced For several years, Russian writers used the Internet in a way that mirrored 
American ideals, particularly the concept of free speech against one's own government. Outspoken nationals like blogger Alexei Navalny enjoyed the freedom to express negative views of the Russian government without any repercussions. Last March, however, a handful of popular Russian indie websites  --  including Nalvany's blog site  --  were shut down by the Russian government without warning or chance for recourse. 
1801. Peter Nguyen, (Hotspot Shield writer), HOTSPOT SHIELD, Oct. 9, 2014 
retrieved April 20, 2015 from http://blog.hotspotshield.com/2014/10/09/russian-  [HYPERLINK: http://blog.hotspotshield.com/2014/10/09/russian-]internet-censorship-helps-keep-putin-power/. Putin knows his citizens are going behind his back to protect their privacy, and he's offered a reward of $110,000 to the person who can --crack the code‖ of Tor, thereby disabling Russian access to the software. The president's actions can be attributed, at least in part, to his disdain for the liberal --Putin Must Go!‖ campaign that has echoed throughout Russia for the last four years. More Internet freedom for Russians could very well mean more muscle behind the --Putin Must Go!‖ campaign. --Bloggers Law‖ Meant to Frighten Dissidents Those who don't use Tor remain vulnerable to the scrutiny of the Russian government. Due to the nature of their work, bloggers and journalists are particularly exposed. Last May, Putin instigated the --Bloggers Law,‖ a ruling that all bloggers in Russia with more than 3,000 daily followers must register their name and home address with the government. All such blogs are now held to the same truth-telling standard as national Russian newspapers are. According to the law, any Russian blogger found guilty of spreading false information will face heavy fines and/or other punishments. 
1802. Peter Nguyen, (Hotspot Shield writer), HOTSPOT SHIELD, Oct. 9, 2014 
retrieved April 20, 2015 from http://blog.hotspotshield.com/2014/10/09/russian-  [HYPERLINK: http://blog.hotspotshield.com/2014/10/09/russian-]internet-censorship-helps-keep-putin-power/. Galina Arapova, an expert on Russian law, said that this ruling is meant to --cut the number of critical voices‖ on the country's digital media landscape. Those who would have otherwise shared negative opinions or facts about Russian government will be less likely to do so because they'll be scared to do so. Social Media Sites Now Burdened With Putin's 
Requirements Putin is covering his bases when it comes to keeping tabs on dissident 
Russian nationals. Not only is he going after bloggers and Tor software users, he's also targeting citizens who use social media sites like Facebook and Twitter. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	14 2 
 
 
1803. Peter Nguyen, (Hotspot Shield writer), HOTSPOT SHIELD, Oct. 9, 2014 	1809. Danielle Kehl, (New America Open Technology Institute policy analyst), NEW retrieved April 20, 2015 from http://blog.hotspotshield.com/2014/10/09/russian-  [HYPERLINK: http://blog.hotspotshield.com/2014/10/09/russian-]	AMERICA FOUNDATION, July 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]
internet-censorship-helps-keep-putin-power/. Last July, Putin signed a law requiring 	newamerica.org/downloads/Surveilance_Costs_Final.pdf. 	Mandatory 	data 

major media sites used by Russians to keep six months' worth of Russian user data 
on their servers at all times. Sites affected by Putin's law include Google, Facebook, and Twitter. If the companies don't follow Putin's demands, they will cease to operate in Russia in September of 2016. This law sounds dramatic and shocking, but critics have equated it to the NSA's tactic of spying on international citizens via social media in the U.S. - a fact leaked by Snowden last year. Nevertheless, most Westerners wince at Putin's outrageous social media demands and fear that Russia is trying to wield more control over Internet affairs than it rightfully should. Putin has had a hand in Russian government for the last 15 years. He's a persuasive political figure with an 84 percent approval rating. When a national leader as powerful and popular as Putin promotes Internet censorship, it garners the attention of the rest of the world. Americans who pride themselves on freedom of speech are particularly baffled and concerned by the activities of Putin, as well as those in his country who rally around him. Only time will tell what becomes of Putin's Internet censorship efforts and the citizens who are affected by these limitations. 
1804. James Fielder, (Iowa political science PhD), IOWA RESEARCH ONLINE, 
2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://ir.uiowa.edu/etd/2870/. Thus, [HYPERLINK: http://ir.uiowa.edu/etd/2870/] the Internet appears theoretically well-suited for protest mobilization. Thanks to the TCP/IP communication protocol, users can connect lo the Internet using numerous systems (desktops, laptops, cell phones, Internet-capable printers and cameras, etc.). Packet switching routes communication through paths of least resistance, making 
information flows difficult to thwart. Users can communicate in real time in a variety 
of formats, from basic text messaging and email to advanced voice-over Internet protocol (VOIP) communication and simultaneous editing of shared geospatial information systems. Yet, authorities in many countries patrol the Internet just as they do physical public spaces, and states such as China, Iran and Myanmar have not hesitated to arrest and punish online dissidents. Indeed, the perception that authorities are on the electronic prowl may have a chilling effect on online dissent, as seen in China and other authoritarian states. Analysts of radical protest movements further assert that some groups avoid the Internet and rely on traditional face-to-face 
communication to avoid scrutiny. Other authoritarian regimes, such as Cuba, have put 
less effort into censorship and focus instead on controlling who has access to the Internet in the first place. 
1805. Cynthia Wong, (Human Rights Watch senior Internet researcher), HUMAN 
RIGHTS WATCH, July 30, 2013 retrieved April 18, 2015 from 
http://www.hrw.org/news/2013/07/30/surveillance-and-corrosion-internet-freedom.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.hrw.org/news/2013/07/30/surveillance-and-corrosion-internet-freedom]
Now the vision and credibility of the US and its allies on Internet freedom is in tatters. I saw this up close in Tunis last month, where the Freedom Online Coalition, a group of governments committed to promoting human rights online, held its annual 
summit. It was just two weeks after the Guardian began writing about the former 
NSA contractor Edward Snowden's disclosures on mass US secret surveillance programs. Along with the UK, France, the Netherlands, and other governments in the coalition, the US has spent millions of dollars supporting new tools to protect the digital privacy of human rights activists globally. But at the meeting, the US was excoriated about its surveillance programs by the activists these governments claimed to support. Instead of a reaffirmation of shared goals, the prevailing mood was of anger, disappointment, and distrust. 
1806. Cynthia Wong, (Human Rights Watch senior Internet researcher), HUMAN 
RIGHTS WATCH, July 30, 2013 retrieved April 18, 2015 from 
http://www.hrw.org/news/2013/07/30/surveillance-and-corrosion-internet-freedom.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.hrw.org/news/2013/07/30/surveillance-and-corrosion-internet-freedom]
The revelations have also exposed glaring contradictions about the US Internet freedom agenda. This has emboldened the Chinese state media, for example, to cynically denounce US hypocrisy, even as the Chinese government continues to censor the Internet, infringe on privacy rights, and curb anonymity online. Though there is hypocrisy on both sides, the widening rift between US values and actions has real, unintended human rights consequences. For the human rights movement, the Internet's impact on rights crystalized in 2005 after we learned that Yahoo! uncritically turned user account information over to the Chinese government, leading 
to a 10-year prison sentence for the journalist Shi Tao. 
1807. Cynthia Wong, (Human Rights Watch senior Internet researcher), HUMAN 
RIGHTS WATCH, July 30, 2013 retrieved April 18, 2015 from 
http://www.hrw.org/news/2013/07/30/surveillance-and-corrosion-internet-freedom.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.hrw.org/news/2013/07/30/surveillance-and-corrosion-internet-freedom]
The mass surveillance scandal has damaged the US government's ability to press for better corporate practices as technology companies expand globally. It will also be more difficult for companies to resist overbroad surveillance mandates if they are seen as complicit in mass US infringements on privacy. Other governments will feel more entitled to ask for the same cooperation that the US receives. We can also 
expect governments around the world to pressure companies to store user data locally 
or maintain a local presence so that governments can more easily access it, as Brazil and Russia are now debating. While comparisons to the Chinese government are overstated, there is reason to worry about the broader precedent the US has set. Just months before the NSA scandal broke, India began rolling out a centralized system to monitor all phone and Internet communications in the country, without much clarity on safeguards to protect rights. This development is chilling, considering the government's problematic use of sedition and Internet laws in recent arrests. 
1808. Tarun Wadhwa. (Hybrid Reality Institute researcher), FORBES, June 13, 2013 
retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.forbes.com/sites/tarunwadhwa/2013/06/13/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/tarunwadhwa/2013/06/13/]
with-nsa-surveillance-us-government-may-have-dealt-major-blow-to-global-internet- freedom-efforts/. In the court of global public opinion, America may have tarnished its moral authority to question the surveillance practices of other nations - whether it be Russia on monitoring journalists, or China on conducting cyber espionage. Declarations by the State Department that were once statements of principle now ring hollow and hypocritical to some. No nation can rival the American surveillance state, but they no longer need support to build their own massive systems of espionage and oppression. The costs of surveillance and data storage technologies are plummeting 
 --  these will no longer be prohibitive factors. Diplomatic pressures and legal barriers 
that had also once served as major deterrents will soon fade away. The goal has been to promote internet freedom around the world, but we may have also potentially created a blueprint for how authoritarian governments can store, track, and mine their citizens' digital lives. 
localization proposals are just one of a number of ways that foreign governments 
have reacted to NSA surveillance in a manner that threatens U.S. foreign policy interests, particularly with regard to Internet Freedom. There has been a quiet tension 
between how the U.S. approaches freedom of expression online in its foreign policy 
and its domestic laws ever since Secretary of State Hillary Clinton effectively launched the Internet Freedom agenda in January 2010. But the NSA disclosures shined a bright spotlight on the contradiction: the U.S. government promotes free expression abroad and aims to prevent repressive governments from monitoring and censoring their citizens while simultaneously supporting domestic laws that authorize surveillance and bulk data collection. As cybersecurity expert and Internet governance scholar Ron Deibert wrote a few days after the first revelations: --There are unintended consequences of the NSA scandal that will undermine U.S. foreign 
policy interests - in particular, the ‗Internet Freedom' agenda espoused by the U.S. 
State Department and its allies.‖ Deibert accurately predicted that the news would trigger reactions from both policymakers and ordinary citizens abroad, who would begin to question their dependence on American technologies and the hidden motivations behind the United States' promotion of Internet Freedom. In some countries, the scandal would be used as an excuse to revive dormant debates about dropping American companies from official contracts, score political points at the expense of the United States, and even justify local monitoring and surveillance. Deibert's speculation has so far proven quite prescient. As we will describe in this 
section, the ongoing revelations have done significant damage to the credibility of the 
U.S. Internet Freedom agenda and further jeopardized the United States' position in 
the global Internet governance debates. 
1810. Danielle Kehl, (New America Open Technology Institute policy analyst), NEW 
AMERICA FOUNDATION, July 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]newamerica.org/downloads/Surveilance_Costs_Final.pdf. Although there were questions from the beginning about whether the United States would hold itself to the same high standards domestically that it holds others to internationally, the American 
government has successfully built up a policy and programming agenda in the past 
few years based on promoting an open Internet. These efforts include raising concerns over Internet repression in bilateral dialogues with countries such as Vietnam and China, supporting initiatives including the Freedom Online Coalition, and providing over $120 million in funding for --groups working to advance Internet freedom - supporting counter-censorship and secure communications technology, digital safety training, and policy and research programs for people facing Internet repression.‖ However, the legitimacy of these efforts has been thrown into question since the NSA disclosures began. --Trust has been the principal casualty in this 
unfortunate affair,‖ wrote Ben FitzGerald and Richard Butler in December 2013. 
--The American public, our nation's allies, leading businesses and Internet users around the world are losing faith in the U.S. government's role as the leading 
proponent of a free, open and integrated global Internet.‖ 
1811. Danielle Kehl, (New America Open Technology Institute policy analyst), NEW 
AMERICA FOUNDATION, July 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]newamerica.org/downloads/Surveilance_Costs_Final.pdf. Prior to the NSA revelations, the United States was already facing an increasingly challenging political climate as it promoted the Internet Freedom agenda in global Internet governance 
conversations. At the 2012 World Conference on International Telecommunications 
(WCIT), the U.S. and diverse group of other countries refused to sign the updated International Telecommunications Regulations based on concerns that the document pushed for greater governmental control of the Internet and would ultimately harm Internet Freedom. Many observers noted that the split hardened the division between two opposing camps in the Internet governance debate: proponents of a status quo multistakeholder Internet governance model, like the United States, who argued that the existing system was the best way to preserve key online freedoms, and those seeking to disrupt or challenge that multistakeholder model for a variety of political 
and economic reasons, including governments like Russia and China pushing for 
greater national sovereignty over the Internet. Many of the proposals for more governmental control over the network could be understood as attempts by authoritarian countries to more effectively monitor and censor their citizens, which allowed the U.S. to reasonably maintain some moral high ground as its delegates walked out of the treaty conference. Although few stakeholders seemed particularly pleased by the outcome of the WCIT, reports indicate that by the middle of 2013 the tone had shifted in a more collaborative and positive direction following the meetings of the 2013 World Telecommunications/ICT Policy Forum (WTPF) and the World Summit on Information Society + 10 (WSIS+10) review. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	14 3 
 
 
 
1812. Danielle Kehl, (New America Open Technology Institute policy analyst), NEW AMERICA FOUNDATION, July 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]newamerica.org/downloads/Surveilance_Costs_Final.pdf. However, the Internet governance conversation took a dramatic turn after the Snowden disclosures. The annual meeting of the Freedom Online Coalition occurred in Tunis in June 2013, just a few weeks after the initial leaks. Unsurprisingly, surveillance dominated the conference even though the agenda covered a wide range of topics from Internet access and affordability to cybersecurity. Throughout the two-day event, representatives from civil society used the platform to confront and criticize governments about their monitoring practices. NSA surveillance would continue to be the focus of international convenings on Internet Freedom and Internet governance for months to come, making civil society representatives and foreign governments far less willing to embrace the United States' Internet Freedom agenda or to accept its defense of the multistakeholder model of Internet governance as a anything other than self-serving. --One can come up with all kinds of excuses for why US surveillance is not hypocrisy. For example, one might argue that US policies are more benevolent than those of many other regimes And one might recognize that in several cases, some branches of government don't know what other branches are doing and therefore US policy is not so much hypocritical as it is inadvertently contradictory,‖ wrote Eli Dourado, a researcher from the Mercatus Center at George Mason University in August 2013. --But the fact is that the NSA is galvanizing opposition to America's internet freedom agenda.‖ The scandal revived proposals from both Russia and Brazil for global management of technical standards and domain names, whether through the ITU or other avenues. Even developing countries, many of whom have traditionally aligned with the U.S. and prioritize access and affordability as top issues, --don't want US assistance because they assume the equipment comes with a backdoor for the NSA. They are walking straight into the arms of Russia, China, and 
the ITU.‖ [ellipses in original] 
1813. Danielle Kehl, (New America Open Technology Institute policy analyst), NEW 
AMERICA FOUNDATION, July 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]


1815. Danielle Kehl, (New America Open Technology Institute policy analyst), NEW AMERICA FOUNDATION, July 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]newamerica.org/downloads/Surveilance_Costs_Final.pdf. Moreover, revelations of what the NSA has been doing in the past decade are eroding the moral high ground that the United States has often relied upon when putting public pressure on authoritarian countries like China, Russia, and Iran to change their behavior. In 2014, 
Reporters Without Borders added the United States to its --Enemies of the Internet‖ 
list for the first time, explicitly linking the inclusion to NSA surveillance. --The main player in [the United States'] vast surveillance operation is the highly secretive National Security Agency (NSA) which, in the light of Snowden's revelations, has come to symbolize the abuses by the world's intelligence agencies,‖ noted the 2014 report. The damaged perception of the United States as a leader on Internet Freedom and its diminished ability to legitimately criticize other countries for censorship and surveillance opens the door for foreign leaders to justify -- and even expand -- their own efforts. For example, the Egyptian government recently announced plans to 
monitor social media for potential terrorist activity, prompting backlash from a 
number of advocates for free expression and privacy. When a spokesman for the Egyptian Interior Ministry, Abdel Fatah Uthman, appeared on television to explain the policy, one justification that he offered in response to privacy concerns was that --the US listens in to phone calls, and supervises anyone who could threaten its national security.‖ This type of rhetoric makes it difficult for the U.S. to effectively criticize such a policy. Similarly, India's comparatively mild response to allegations of NSA surveillance have been seen by some critics --as a reflection of India's own aspirations in the world of surveillance,‖ a further indication that U.S. spying may 
now make it easier for foreign governments to quietly defend their own behavior. It is 
even more difficult for the United States to credibly indict Chinese hackers for breaking into U.S. government and commercial targets without fear of retribution in light of the NSA revelations. These challenges reflect an overall decline in U.S. soft power on free expression issues. 
1816. Christopher Walker, (National Endowment for Democracy International Forum 

newamerica.org/downloads/Surveilance_Costs_Final.pdf. 	Consequently, 	NSA 	for Democratic Studies executive director), FREEDOM HOUSE, May 13, 2014 

surveillance has shifted the dynamics of the Internet governance debate in a potentially destabilizing manner. The Snowden revelations --have also been well- received by those who seek to discredit existing approaches to Internet governance,‖ 
wrote the Center for Democracy & Technology's Matthew Shears. --There has been a 
long-running antipathy among a number of stakeholders to the United States government's perceived control of the Internet and the dominance of US Internet companies. There has also been a long-running antipathy, particularly among some governments, to the distributed and open management of the Internet.‖ Shears points out that evidence of the NSA's wide-ranging capabilities has fueled general concerns about the current Internet governance system, bolstering the arguments of those calling for a new government-centric governance order. At the UN Human Rights Council in September 2013, the representative from Pakistan -- speaking on behalf of 
Cuba, Venezuela, Zimbabwe, Uganda, Ecuador, Russia, Indonesia, Bolivia, Iran, and 
China -- explicitly linked the revelations about surveillance programs to the need for reforming Internet governance processes and institutions to give governments a larger role. Surveillance issues continued to dominate the conversation at the 2013 Internet Governance Forum in Bali as well, where --debates on child protection, education and infrastructure were overshadowed by widespread concerns from delegates who said the public's trust in the internet was being undermined by reports of US and British 
government surveillance.‖ 
1814. Danielle Kehl, (New America Open Technology Institute policy analyst), NEW 
AMERICA FOUNDATION, July 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.  [HYPERLINK: http://www/]
newamerica.org/downloads/Surveilance_Costs_Final.pdf. The effects of the NSA disclosures on the Internet Freedom agenda go beyond the realm of Internet governance. The loss of the United States as a model on Internet Freedom issues has made it harder for local civil society groups around the world -- including the groups that the State Department's Internet Freedom programs typically support -- to advocate for Internet Freedom within their own governments. The Committee to Protect Journalists, for example, reports that in Pakistan, --where freedom of expression is largely perceived as a Western notion, the Snowden revelations have had a damaging effect. The deeply polarized narrative has become starker as the 
corridors of power push back on attempts to curb government surveillance.‖ For 
some of these groups, in fact, even the appearance of collaboration with or support from the U.S. government can diminish credibility, making it harder for them to achieve local goals that align with U.S. foreign policy interests. The gap in trust is particularly significant for individuals and organizations that receive funding from the 
U.S. government for free expression activities or circumvention tools. Technology 
supported by or exported from the United States is, in some cases, inherently suspect 
due to the revelations about the NSA's surveillance dragnet and the agency's attempts to covertly influence product development. 
retrieved April 21, 2015 from https://freedomhouse.org/blog/russias-media- 
imperialism#.VTZObCFVhBd Despite its effectiveness, the Kremlin's massive investment in propaganda and censorship betrays the Russian leadership's anxiety 
about its own grasp on power. Indeed, the overall effort to destabilize Ukraine and its 
critical May 25 elections reflects the deep insecurities stemming from the Putin regime's own lack of democratic legitimacy. The latest mutation of Russia's media began with the mass antigovernment protests in Moscow and other cities in 2011-12, and gathered pace with the rise of popular protests in Kyiv. Both protest movements were a public response to deeply corrupt, unresponsive, and increasingly repressive systems. The common features of these two popular movements -- and their implications -- were not lost on the Kremlin. 
1817. Christopher Walker, (National Endowment for Democracy International Forum 
for Democratic Studies executive director), FREEDOM HOUSE, May 13, 2014 
retrieved April 21, 2015 from https://freedomhouse.org/blog/russias-media- imperialism#.VTZObCFVhBd. The elaborate media weaponry deployed by Russia and the venomous messaging it projects cannot be wished away. There is little doubt that its success to date will encourage the authorities to rely even more on media manipulation and subterfuge. Given this likelihood, understanding the two connected challenges presented by the Russia's illiberal media system is essential. One arises from censorship, the other from propaganda. Russia's deepening censorship means that ordinary Russians are increasingly cut off from independent information about 
the actions of their own government and the wider world. It suggests that outside 
efforts to enable the flow of such information into Russia will need to be enhanced. Meanwhile, the ever more sophisticated propaganda disseminated by the Kremlin, which is grounded in anti-Westernism and anti-Americanism, requires a more effective answer from democracies, which have been caught flat-footed by the Russian media onslaught. Putin's regime and other corrupt, repressive governments need a first-rate propaganda capacity and an ability to silence alternative voices. After all, what the authoritarians actually offer by way of a governing vision demonstrably lacks mass appeal. Russia's leaders undoubtedly understand this all too well, and 
therefore invest as much as possible in media arsenals that can distract the public 
from the grim reality they have created. 
1818. Rebecca Favret, (Richmond JD candidate), RICHMOND JOURNAL OF 
GLOBAL LAW AND BUSINESS, Spring 2013, retrieved April 21, 2015 from 
http://scholarship.richmond.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1016&context=law-  [HYPERLINK: http://scholarship.richmond.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1016&amp;context=law-]
student-publications. With his combination of intimidation tactics and ability to effectively handpick the nation's legislature, Putin is able to further control opposition to his leadership. Just in the months following the most recent legislative election, Putin has pushed through numerous laws that stifle free speech and the media in an effort to stamp out criticism. Opponents of the President have been 
swiftly silenced - either through prosecution and imprisonment under the new laws or 
through extra-legal tactics, including the mysterious disappearances and blatant assassinations of vocal dissidents. Silencing critics in Russia is nothing new, but the government has seemingly renewed its crusade against opposition through legislation that stifles free speech. 
1819. Emily Parker, (New America Foundation senior fellow), FOREIGN POLICY, 
Sept. 24, 2014 retrieved April 20, 2015 from http://www.foreignpolicy.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.foreignpolicy.com/]articles/2014/09/24/putin_cyberphobia_russia_internet_media. Russia's actions in Ukraine have distracted the world from the Kremlin's invasion of the Internet. Now, 
as the world is consumed by other Putin-related headlines, Russia's Internet freedom 
is quickly slipping away. This is not just a technology story. Putin's attitude toward the web sheds further light on his isolationism and his fear of domestic critics. The current Internet crackdown also suggests that Putin, despite high approval ratings, may not be as secure as he appears. Generally speaking, confident leaders do not feel seriously threatened by social media. Until recently, Russia's Internet was relatively free, compared to newspapers and television. Russia, at least thus far, has not followed the Chinese model of Internet censorship. There is no --Great Firewall of Russia‖ to block content from abroad. Nor are there countless banned keywords and 
armies of human censors to delete sensitive content. Russians could go online and 
complain about corruption, injustice, and even Putin himself, and the Kremlin 
wouldn't crack down because authorities didn't view the Web as a political threat. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	14 4 
 
 
 
1820. Dan Poulton, (Counterfire organizer), COUNTERFIRE, Dec. 1, 2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.counterfire.org/articles/book-reviews/16841-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.counterfire.org/articles/book-reviews/16841-the-]power-of-the-internet-in-china. By 2006 there were over seven million active blogs in Chinese cyberspace and the use of flash animations, digital photographs and videos were widespread. There have been many online innovations such as the use of a voting forum leading to one blogger having copyright infringement charges against him dropped. Yet, Yang warns that both internet access and its creative use for protest are constantly ‗matters of contention. Neither can be taken for granted. Online activity thus stretches the field of Chinese politics into ever more uncharted zones. It 
challenges state power by stretching its battleground.' 
1821. Dan Poulton, (Counterfire organizer), COUNTERFIRE, Dec. 1, 2013, retrieved 
April 14, 2015 from http://www.counterfire.org/articles/book-reviews/16841-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.counterfire.org/articles/book-reviews/16841-the-]power-of-the-internet-in-china. China's ‗Ministry of Public Security' is responsible for ‗safeguarding network security', which requires a far reaching bureaucracy extending ‗all the way down to township levels'. In 2007 a teachers' strike demanding salary rises led to the immediate publication of stories of demonstrations 
on a popular BBS teachers' forum. The next day the forum published a message 
saying that the discussions had ‗seriously strayed away from the original intentions of this forum' and the facility to publish new posts was ‗temporarily shut down'. Organizations which hosted contentious posts on their servers received ‗friendly visits' from Chinese officials. 
1822. Dan Poulton, (Counterfire organizer), COUNTERFIRE, Dec. 1, 2013, retrieved 
April 14, 2015 from http://www.counterfire.org/articles/book-reviews/16841-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.counterfire.org/articles/book-reviews/16841-the-]power-of-the-internet-in-china. Throughout the 2000s, internet control grew into a rapidly ‗more expansive and hegemonic' apparatus of state control, with the 
--principle of Party supremacy‖ overruling other considerations'. The CCP walks a 
constant tightrope of maximizing economic growth ‗subject to the constraint of keeping itself in power'. Avoiding crude technological utopianism, Yang observes that whilst the internet provides much potential for dissent and resistance, ‗the same technology that allows internet users to speak out allows the state to censor speech'. The Chinese state seeks to frame public debate by using hired people to work as ‗internet commentators', shaping debate online, ‗to covertly guide the direction of the debates in accordance with the principles laid down by the propaganda departments of the Party'. 
1823. Minxin Pei, (Tom and Margot Pritzker Professor of Government at Claremont 
McKenna College), FORTUNE MAGAZINE, July 22, 2014, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://fortune.com/2014/07/22/china-information-censorship/. About [HYPERLINK: http://fortune.com/2014/07/22/china-information-censorship/] a year ago, China's new political leadership launched a ferocious crackdown on social media, arresting influential bloggers with millions of followers on weibo, the Chinese equivalent of Twitter. Some were later sentenced to prison terms for alleged --rumor- mongering.‖ The country's supreme court and prosecutors also reinterpreted Chinese law to make posting --rumors‖ on the Internet a crime. The aggressive move against China's vibrant social media, obviously carried out at the behest of China's top leaders, proved surprisingly effective -- contrary to those who assume that authoritarian regimes are powerless in dealing with disruptive and fast-evolving information technologies. In less than a year, the censors have tamed China's weibo. If you expect the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) to celebrate its victory and take a break, you are mistaken. Last year's crackdown on social media was merely the opening salvo of the CCP's war on the information revolution. The Chinese government has since escalated its offensive with unprecedented determination. As usual, foreign websites and Internet portals received special attention. The English website of the New York Times has been blocked by the Great Firewall (Beijing used to block only the Chinese website of the newspaper). Google has been rendered inaccessible inside China as well. 
1824. Jason Abbott, (Louisville Asian Democracy Center director), TAIWAN 
JOURNAL OF DEMOCRACY, December 2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from 


1826. James Fielder, (Iowa political science PhD), IOWA RESEARCH ONLINE, 2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://ir.uiowa.edu/etd/2870/. Thus, [HYPERLINK: http://ir.uiowa.edu/etd/2870/] the Internet 
appears theoretically well-suited for protest mobilization The Internet's capacity for horizontal communication is also particularly germane to association, the public sphere and spatial structure, as the Internet has facilitated the founding and growth of large digital activist networks and also altered existing media formats, sociocultural patterns and political engagement. The Internet also appears designed to structurally transform the public sphere by increasing citizen capacity to express attitudes, desires, and needs, and challenge others without fear of retribution. Howard also contends that civil society flourishes online when authoritarian states block physical 
collective action: returning to the premise that the public sphere can be physical or 
virtual, the Internet thus becomes a --discursive space‖ that strengthens social ties, fosters formation of new ties, and exists beyond the reach of the state. 
1827. Takin Aghdashloo, (Global Voices correspondent), GLOBAL VOICES, Oct. 8, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/10/08/hassan-  [HYPERLINK: http://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/10/08/hassan-]rouhanis-iranian-nuclear-balancing-act/. Although these positions seem disappointing for freedom of expression in Iran, they could perhaps be justified by Rouhani's strategy of mediating between the non-elected religious leadership of Iran and the West to solve the nuclear crisis. This is part and parcel of Rouhani's understanding of the complex interplay of powers in Iran and how to retain their support in the fragile process of negotiations. This strategy is not specific to his New York trip, it has been visible over the past few months in his administration's increasingly reconciliatory approach towards the religious conservative opposition. It is a sign of a true realist pragmatist approach to gaining internal support for solving the country's most substantial threat: sanctions. 
1828. Takin Aghdashloo, (Global Voices correspondent), GLOBAL VOICES, Oct. 8, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/10/08/hassan-  [HYPERLINK: http://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/10/08/hassan-]
rouhanis-iranian-nuclear-balancing-act/. It is important to point out that the Iranians 
didn't elect Rouhani only as the former chief nuclear negotiator to bargain with the West. Rather, they elected him to play the role of mediator between the two real power holders in this crisis: Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, and the United States. As the trusted channel for communication between the two parties, Rouhani's conservative position on Iran's human rights issues in New York becomes explicable. A mediator should always maintain the trust of both negotiating parties, otherwise there would be little chance of achieving anything. This is why he does not escalate tensions with institutions such as the Iranian judiciary, even when they 
publicly criticize his cultural, social and internal policies, because these are bodies 
often appointed by or closely tied to Ayatollah Khamenei. Any internal tensions in Iran in this last chapter of negotiations before November 24th could potentially derail the entire process. In fact, the biggest mistake Rouhani could make is to give up his influence and credibility within the nation's unelected powerhouses in favor of prestige and public support from the Iranian opposition in the next two months. This would alienate the powerful religious elements in the regime. 
1829. Takin Aghdashloo, (Global Voices correspondent), GLOBAL VOICES, Oct. 8, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/10/08/hassan-  [HYPERLINK: http://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/10/08/hassan-]rouhanis-iranian-nuclear-balancing-act/. In the weeks leading up to the UN General 
Assembly and in the days following his return to Tehran, Rouhani's administration 
has attempted to absorb and build confidence amongst the regime's political elite by rescinding his reformist policies. There is a long list of these instances, including when Rouhani and Mohammad Baqer Nobakht (the administration's spokesperson) referred to the violation of the hijab dress code as a disease; when the Minister of Culture and Islamic Guidance's assumed pro-censorship positions on the film industry; the removal of reformist senior managers in the Ministry of Science; the delay in the scheduled Internet bandwidth increase; the formation of a committee to forge closer ties with the top Shia clerics; and abandoning any attempt to release the 
political dissidents Mir-Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karoubi. It is Rouhani's realist- 
pragmatist approach to politics that has enabled him to be at the helm of politics at 

http://www.tfd.org.tw/export/sites/tfd/files/publication/journal/dj0902/005.pdf.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.tfd.org.tw/export/sites/tfd/files/publication/journal/dj0902/005.pdf]	It  [HYPERLINK: http://www.tfd.org.tw/export/sites/tfd/files/publication/journal/dj0902/005.pdf]	one of the most sensitive moments in Iran's recent history. He was one of the few 

must be said that should an essay such as this one have been written comparing Egypt 
and Tunisia in mid-2010, it is likely that it would not have predicted the Arab Spring. It must be recognized, therefore, that the Internet provides an infrastructure that can 
greatly facilitate the rapid spread of yet unseen revolutions. But. whereas the Arab 
Spring used a variety of foreign-based platforms that the Middle Eastern regimes proved unable to manage, the Chinese state has made unprecedented progress in moving Chinese Internet users onto mainland-based platforms that it can more easily control. Only time will tell, therefore, if the difference between Twitter and Wei bo could mean the difference between the success or failure of an oppositional or even revolutionary movement. 
1825. Emily Parker, (New America Foundation senior fellow), SARAH CRICHTON 
BOOKS, Feb. 3, 2015 retrieved from Google Books. Although Egyptian authorities targeted individual bloggers, they didn't seem to see the Web as a serious threat. Thus, the Internet offered possibilities that didn't exist in --real‖ life. When state media presented a distorted version of reality, bloggers reported on events themselves. They took photographs and posted videos on YouTube. They fiercely debated, signed petitions, and organized street demonstrations. The now famous --We Are All Khaled Said‖ Facebook page, named after a blogger who was beaten to death by police, played a key role in organizing the January 25, 2011, protests. But the ability to mobilize citizens via social media did not materialize overnight. Previous Internet campaigns helped build networks and trust. In a country where you needed a permit to gather more than five people, tens of thousands of individuals were joining forces online. In 2009 Rasha Abdulla, a professor at the American University in Cairo, described such sites as Facebook as --virtual nations, a place where members can roam freely without worrying about the restrictions their own countries and political systems might be imposing on them.‖ On the Internet, ordinary Egyptians began to overcome the isolation, fear, and apathy that are the lifeblood of authoritarian regimes. 
moderate politicians that refused to side with protesters in 2009, after millions of Iranians took to the streets to protest against the alleged election fraud that reinstated Ahmadinejad as President. His silence on that matter gained him the green light from Ayatollah Khamenei to run in last year's elections. Perhaps another conservative gesture by Rouhani can unlock the much more complicated nuclear impasse and entrench him as the leader uniquely skilled at one thing -- mediating between 
Khamenei and the United States. 
1830. Cornelius Adebahr, (Carnegie Europe Program associate), CARNEGIE 
ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE, Nov. 13, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://carnegieendowment.org/2014/11/13/what-iran-would-do-without-  [HYPERLINK: http://carnegieendowment.org/2014/11/13/what-iran-would-do-without-]nuclear-deal/hueq. Many Western analysts see Iran's president, Hassan Rouhani, as the leader most needing to reach a deal. A common view in Western circles is that Iran agreed to enter into negotiations because international sanctions are pressuring the government of the centrist Rouhani, elected nearly eighteen months ago for promising change, to deliver. The thinking goes that he has banked his presidency on an accommodation with the international community that would allow Iran to shed its status as an economic and a political pariah. He needs a lifting of sanctions to pursue the other part of his agenda, which involves promoting a more liberal society at home. Without broader economic relief, he has no chance of taking on the hardliners in Iran. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	14 5 
 
 
 
1831. Cornelius Adebahr, (Carnegie Europe Program associate), CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE, Nov. 13, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://carnegieendowment.org/2014/11/13/what-iran-would-do-without-  [HYPERLINK: http://carnegieendowment.org/2014/11/13/what-iran-would-do-without-]nuclear-deal/hueq. Rouhani's presidency of --hope and prudence,‖ meanwhile, may not last. If the negotiations failed, that approach would be over even if Rouhani himself remained in power. Politics would revert back to its state before the centrist was elected, which is more hardline in orientation, although there would be fewer quarrels within the conservative camp given a pliant president. More than before, the supreme leader via his representatives in each department would be determining the policies of the government, with some more reform-minded ministers choosing to leave. In this scenario, with the principalists' overall access to the levers of power and Rouhani's inability to fulfill his election promises of change and moderation, the hardliners would most likely win the next parliamentary election. This will be held in March 2016, jointly with the vote giving another eight-year term to the Assembly of Experts, the body officially charged with selecting the supreme leader and supervising his work. This first-ever twin election would probably provide Rouhani's opponents a boost ahead of the 2017 presidential election. 
1832. Ben Offiler, (Nottingham American studies professor), EA WORLDVIEW, 
Feb. 7, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://eaworldview.com/2014/02/iran-ali-  [HYPERLINK: http://eaworldview.com/2014/02/iran-ali-]amini-hassan-rouhani-historical-analogies/. The latest development in Iran's foreign policy, from the thaw in relations with Washington to an interim nuclear deal, are part of a complex political dance in Tehran. As EA reported last week, President Rouhani has entered into an agreement with the Supreme Leader: to safeguard the interim 
nuclear agreement, Rouhani is sidelining issues of political and cultural --freedom‖. 
1833. Ben Offiler, (Nottingham American studies professor), EA WORLDVIEW, 
Feb. 7, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://eaworldview.com/2014/02/iran-ali-  [HYPERLINK: http://eaworldview.com/2014/02/iran-ali-]amini-hassan-rouhani-historical-analogies/. The problem for both Rouhani and the Supreme Leader is that these critics, much like their conservative counterparts in the United States, would seek to undermine the negotiations over Iran's nuclear programme. The Supreme Leader's agreement with Rouhani says he will protect the president's nuclear foreign policy so long as the administration holds off from pursuing --initiatives to open up Iran's political and cultural space‖. The results of this understanding are already emerging, as earlier this week a number of Grand Ayatollahs endorsed Rouhani's nuclear policy. The lesson from the Shah-Amini example, in conjunction with the deal between Khamenei and Rouhani, suggests that the Supreme Leader will not further undercut the President unless two interlinked circumstances arise. The first is if the two men's goals diverge dramatically. At the moment they both share the desire for a solution to the nuclear issue and the lifting of western sanctions. However, if Rouhani pushes in a direction of which Khamenei disapproves  --  i.e. limiting censorship or freeing political prisoners, most notably the reformist leaders Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karroubi  --  then the Supreme Leader will actively seek to curb his power. 
1834. Geneive Abdo, (Stimson's Middle East program fellow), AMERICA 
ALJAZEERA, Feb. 18, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://america.  [HYPERLINK: http://america/]
aljazeera.com/opinions/2014/2/hassan-rouhani-iranalikhameneinuclearnegotiations. 
html. The verbal warfare among political elites in Iran centers on the interim nuclear deal Tehran signed with Washington and other world powers and the ongoing negotiations that have already come to define Rouhani's presidency. Not since Khatami's two terms in office, from 1997 to 2005, has an Iranian leader made such significant overtures to improve relations with the West and the United States in particular. At first it seemed Iran's Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, through his public support for the nuclear negotiations, was restraining public criticism of Rouhani. But a series of recent events indicate that either Khamenei's support is waning or his hard-line supporters feel they can take a stand independent of Khamenei, who has endorsed Rouhani's presidency for now. A third possibility is that Khamenei may be allowing attacks against Rouhani so he does not appear to betray his base of support. For example, last week conservatives in charge of the Islamic Republic of Iran 
Broadcasting blocked the new president from delivering a live address to the nation. 
Rouhani immediately turned to Twitter  --  part of his social media channels that have gained him a wide following  --  to announce this censorship by the state network. An hour later, he was allowed to speak. 
1835. Azadeh Moaveni, (Foreign Policy correspondent), FOREIGN POLICY, June 
23, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://foreignpolicy.com/2014/06/23/the-  [HYPERLINK: http://foreignpolicy.com/2014/06/23/the-]moderation-will-not-be-televised/. But Rouhani's attempt to quiet the hard-line media has also apparently won the backing of a higher power. A flurry of accounts from Iranian officials and news media suggest that Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali 
Khamenei himself has stepped into the fray, ordering hard-line news outlets to stand 
down. Iranian Intelligence Minister Mahmoud Alavi said in a speech this month that Khamenei had grown dismayed with the media's --spreading of lies‖ and had --issued a stern warning to the media responsible‖ - and, when that didn't work, summoned the unnamed outlet's leadership, asking, --Why are you trying to weaken this government?‖ Ali Saeedi, the Supreme Leader's representative to the IRGC, also said last week that --news outlets and media affiliated with the Revolutionary Guards,‖ are responsible for publishing --imprecise and reckless news.‖ The comment added to the impression that the supreme leader himself may be working to shield Rouhani's 
government from further aggravation, as it attempts to negotiate an accord with the 
West over Iran's nuclear program. 
1836. Azadeh Moaveni, (Foreign Policy correspondent), FOREIGN POLICY, June 
23, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://foreignpolicy.com/2014/06/23/the-  [HYPERLINK: http://foreignpolicy.com/2014/06/23/the-]moderation-will-not-be-televised/. Perhaps due to Khamenei's support for Rouhani, the state media attacks today pale in comparison to the massive campaign against Khatami, who served from 1997 through 2005. In that era, IRIB and other media institutions ran what reformists called --the destruction room‖ - an organized command center from which they orchestrated a media campaign that questioned Khatami's loyalty to Islam and painted his diplomatic efforts as a stealthy bid to 
restore relations with the United States. This time around, the hard-line press has 
been conspicuously muted on the presence of senior American officials at the nuclear negotiations, something that would have ordinarily been grounds for a tremendous fuss - an indication that Khamenei is likely exercising his influence. But a July 20 deadline to reach an agreement looms. Should Rouhani and his negotiators fail - or should Khamenei either change his mind on backing a deal, or decide the government no longer needs protection - the president might once see the gloves really come off. If that happens, he may find that a low-budget documentary was the just the beginning. 


1837. Ben Offiler, (Nottingham American studies professor), EA WORLDVIEW, Feb. 7, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://eaworldview.com/2014/02/iran-ali-  [HYPERLINK: http://eaworldview.com/2014/02/iran-ali-]amini-hassan-rouhani-historical-analogies/. Beyond its reference to the Holocaust, the Supreme Leader's speech is an intervention the ongoing conflict between the Rouhani administration  --  in particular the President and the Islamic Guidance and Culture Ministry  --  and hardline political elements within the regime. Leading the 
charge against the government is the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, which has 
resisted the government's policies on cultural issues since Rouhani's election. The battle between the --moderate‖ Rouhani government and its --hardline‖ opponents had been temporarily put to one side by the Supreme Leader: to protect the president's nuclear policy, Ayatollah Khamenei warned Rouhani against efforts to open up the domestic sphere on questions of culture. The tension did not disappear, however. Political tempers simmered and then boiled over as hardliners renewed criticism of Government officials. The Supreme Leader's latest proclamation moves him from referee to participant. It is a firm signal that, while he might stand behind Rouhani's 
nuclear negotiations, he is backing the hardline position on cultural questions. 
1838. Christian Emery, (Plymouth IR lecturer), ASHARQ AL-AWSAT, April 4, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.aawsat.net/2014/04/article55330836.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.aawsat.net/2014/04/article55330836]Rouhani is currently popular in Iran, but that may change if the economy doesn't improve. While ending the sanctions is vital to this effort, the government also needs to drastically cut the state subsidies that keep domestic energy prices low. The subsidies contribute to high inflation levels and are a huge drain on resources, but cutting them will arouse considerable protest. This will sap energy from the government's attempt to defend cultural openness. Rouhani's controversial 
diplomatic engagement with the West is currently protected by Khamenei, but reports 
suggest that this is conditional on Rouhani not pushing domestic reform too aggressively. At stake in Iran's culture wars, therefore, is not just political reform and economic growth in Iran, but also the nuclear negotiations. 
1839. Dennis Ross (Georgetown diplomacy professor), FOREIGN AFFAIRS, Oct. 
16, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.foreignaffairs.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.foreignaffairs.com/]articles/142219/dennis-ross/how-to-muddle-through-with-iran. One negotiator from the P5+1 (the five permanent members of the UN Security Council plus Germany) told me that he expects that if there is no agreement before the talks end, the Iranians will take the lid off their program and rapidly ramp up their uranium enrichment 
program. Tehran would resume enriching uranium at 20 percent, increase its use of 
next generation centrifuges, and expand its stockpiles of enriched material. This would shrink the so-called break-out time that Iran would require to produce weapons-grade enriched uranium and potentially hide it. And that, in turn, would mean that the United States could no longer be confident that it could prevent Iran from possessing nuclear weapons. How would the United States respond? Its first step would almost certainly be to introduce more draconian sanctions against Tehran and mobilize international support for them. (The most important of these sanctions would be designed to greatly curtail Iran's ability to export its oil.) Notwithstanding 
the new sanctions, the Israeli government's temptation to launch a military strike 
against the Iranian nuclear program would surely grow - not only because of the increased threat of Tehran's program, but also because the international community might be more forgiving of Israeli military action in circumstances where the Iranians appear to be rapidly accelerating their nuclear program. 
1840. Dina Esfandiary, (International Institute for Strategic Studies research 
associate), NATIONAL INTEREST, Oct. 22, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from 
http://nationalinterest.org/blog/the-buzz/perfect-solution-nuclear-talks-iran-deal-  [HYPERLINK: http://nationalinterest.org/blog/the-buzz/perfect-solution-nuclear-talks-iran-deal-]
deemed-imperfect-by-11528. The rise of ISIS and the instability left behind by the 
Arab Spring has cemented dysfunction in the Middle East. While hostile states are 
undesirable, deterring or defeating them is still within the realm of possibilities for a country like the United States. But no one has a solution to utter chaos. Strong regional partners are vital to managing the current disorder. States like Turkey and Saudi Arabia partially fulfill that role. But Iran is a dominant state in the region. It is large, resource rich and a potentially powerful partner in an unstable region. It is the largest country in the Middle East with the capacity to pursue a serious international agenda. A nonhostile relationship with a Tehran who could be convinced not to want nuclear weapons would be worth its weight in gold. The future course of the West's 
relationship with Iran hangs on reaching a nuclear deal. For better or worst, 
meaningful dialogue with Iran is predicated on resolving this issue -- all other problems have taken a back seat over the past two decades. If the negotiators aren't 
able to bridge their differences, then there will be little future dialogue with Iran. 
1841. Dina Esfandiary, (International Institute for Strategic Studies research 
associate), NATIONAL INTEREST, Oct. 22, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from 
http://nationalinterest.org/blog/the-buzz/perfect-solution-nuclear-talks-iran-deal-  [HYPERLINK: http://nationalinterest.org/blog/the-buzz/perfect-solution-nuclear-talks-iran-deal-]
deemed-imperfect-by-11528. It's imperative that both sides explore all avenues for overlap in the nuclear talks. Tehran believes the P5+1's demands are --excessive.‖ For Iran, the key issue is to avoid the reality or appearance of coercion. What would happen to President Obama if he appeared to give in to bullying by a foreign power? The same goes for Tehran -- it can't accept a deal that makes it look like it said --yes‖ with its tail between its legs. But the P5+1 seems to have a more flexible negotiating position than the Iranians give it credit for. If the P5+1 can effectively communicate this to Iran, then a settlement is plausibly within reach. By definition, a successful agreement will be one where neither side feels it has achieved a perfect deal. But if the P5+1 and Iran reach a comprehensive deal, it will constrain Iran's nuclear program, boost Rouhani's liberalism in Iran and pave the way for a new era where the West can more comfortably coordinate with Iran on regional crises. Everyone will be 
better off. 
1842. Ryan Costello, (NIAC policy fellow), NIA COUNCIL, March 30, 2015 
retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.niacouncil.org/stakes-are-high-for-iran-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.niacouncil.org/stakes-are-high-for-iran-]nuclear-negotiations/. This week, the U.S. has a chance to lead an international coalition into an agreement that would guard against any attempt by Iran to obtain a nuclear weapon. However, the decades since the Iranian Revolution in 1979 are littered with missed opportunities to resolve differences between the U.S. and Iran, including on the nuclear issue. With political capital expended to keep the negotiations afloat, particularly in Washington, and the list of issues to be resolved 
shrinking, these negotiations have steadily risen in importance. As a result, failure or 
the rash rejection of a breakthrough by Congress or Iranian hardliners could result in irreparable damage to the diplomatic track, with profound consequences for an already chaotic region. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	14 6 
 
 
 
1843. Ryan Costello, (NIAC policy fellow), NIA COUNCIL, March 30, 2015 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.niacouncil.org/stakes-are-high-for-iran-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.niacouncil.org/stakes-are-high-for-iran-]nuclear-negotiations/. Now, with the political scales tilted heavily in favor of diplomacy, failure could eliminate diplomatic prospects for the foreseeable future. Escalation will be the name of the game if negotiations fail, as lead U.S. negotiator Wendy Sherman articulated in October. Congress would pass sanctions and President Obama might not put up much of a fight. Iran would expand its nuclear program and limit the access of international inspectors. The sanctions regime would fray or potentially collapse, diminishing U.S. leverage over Iran. Tacit cooperation in Iraq to counter ISIS militants could end, with dangerous consequences. 
1844. Ryan Costello, (NIAC policy fellow), NIA COUNCIL, March 30, 2015 
retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.niacouncil.org/stakes-are-high-for-iran-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.niacouncil.org/stakes-are-high-for-iran-]nuclear-negotiations/. It has been ten years since the European 3 (the United Kingdom, France and Germany) had a golden opportunity to constrain Iran's nuclear program. Those talks fell apart largely due to the George W. Bush administration's insistence that any agreement result in Iran eliminating its entire centrifuge program. As a result, Iran went from hundreds to 20,000 centrifuges as economic pressure escalated but failed to achieve any strategic goal. Now, diplomacy has once again halted the Iranian program's advance and could lead to a historic breakthrough that reshapes the U.S.-Iran relationship, cuts off Iran's pathways to a nuclear weapon and averts a disastrous war. If an agreement falls through, however, getting through another ten years without a war, an Iranian nuclear weapon, or both would likely prove more challenging than reaching the diplomatic inflection point that the parties now face in Lausanne. 
1845. Thomas Buonomo, (former military intelligence officer), HUFFINGTON 
POST, Jan. 30, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.huffington 


1849. Loren Thompson, (Lexington Institute strategic consultant and Georgetown government PhD), FORBES, Jan. 2, 2015 retrieved May 3, 2015 from 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/lorenthompson/2015/01/02/why-putins-russia-is-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/lorenthompson/2015/01/02/why-putins-russia-is-the-]
biggest-threat-to-america-in-2015/. A deep sense of grievance. Blaming outsiders for domestic troubles has a long pedigree in Russian political tradition, and it feeds into a deep-seated sense that Russia has been deprived of its rightful role in the world by the 
U.S. and other Western powers. Russia may have little past experience with 
democracy, but it was a major power for centuries prior to the collapse of communism. Like authoritarian rulers in other nations, Putin has built his political base by appealing to nationalism, fashioning a revisionist view of recent events in which Russia is the victim rather that the author of its own misfortunes. has called the break-up of the Soviet Union a tragedy of epic proportions, and apparently really believes it. By tapping into a deep vein of resentment in Russian political culture, Putin has created a broad constituency for standing up to outsiders even if it means prolonged economic hardship and the danger of war. 
1850. Loren Thompson, (Lexington Institute strategic consultant and Georgetown 
government PhD), FORBES, Jan. 2, 2015 retrieved May 3, 2015 from 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/lorenthompson/2015/01/02/why-putins-russia-is-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/lorenthompson/2015/01/02/why-putins-russia-is-the-]
biggest-threat-to-america-in-2015/. A vulnerable antagonist. Federal Reserve chair Janet Yellen says America faces little danger from Russia's current troubles, but 
that's because she thinks in economic terms. In a broader sense, America potentially 
is in great danger because Putin and his advisors really believe they are the target of a Western plot to weaken their country. The biggest concern is that some new move by Russia along its borders degenerates into a crisis where Moscow thinks it can improve its tactical situation by threatening local use of nuclear weapons, and then the crisis escalates. At that point U.S. policymakers would have to face the reality that (1) they are unwilling to fight Russia to protect places like Ukraine, and (2) they 

post.com/thomas-j-buonomo/americans-must-exercise-t_b_4699196.html. 	The 	have no real defenses of the American homeland against a sizable nuclear attack. In 

escalation in tension would likely lead to military conflict, if not initiated by the U.S. 
then by Israel, which would likely suck the U.S. in. Senator Dianne Feinstein, Chairman of the Senate Select Intelligence Committee, who is privy to the most secret intelligence on Iran within Congress, went so far as to warn that the imposition of additional sanctions would be --a march toward war.‖ A spokeswoman for the White House's National Security Council concurred with her assessment. While advocates for war would have you believe that surgical airstrikes against Iran's nuclear program would be the extent of U.S. engagement, Iran's government would probably feel compelled to retaliate strongly against the U.S., potentially leading to a serious and uncontrollable military escalation if Iran succeeded in inflicting serious pain on the U.S. Furthermore, the Iranian government would probably resolve to rebuild, militarize, and fortify it nuclear program against future airstrikes. Under this scenario, a U.S. invasion of Iran involving several hundred thousand troops would be necessary to ultimately eliminate the threat. And recent history demonstrates that even for the most powerful nation in the world, war is a roll of the dice. 
1846. Shadia Nasralla, (Reuters reporter), REUTERS, Feb. 20, 2015 retrieved April 
16, 2015 from http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/02/20/us-iran-nuclear-iaea-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/02/20/us-iran-nuclear-iaea-]idUSKBN0LO1AE20150220. The disconnection reflects Iran addressing concerns 
about its enrichment (of uranium),‖ said the Washington-based Institute for Science and International Security (ISIS), which closely tracks Iran's nuclear program. --The disconnection provides additional confidence that Iran is abiding by its commitments under the Joint Plan of Action,‖ it said, referring to the 2013 agreement. Still, Iran has stalled the U.N. inquiry in other areas. International talks are resuming in Geneva on Friday with the aim of narrowing remaining gaps in negotiations to end Iran's 12- year standoff with the six powers. 
1847. Loren Thompson, (Lexington Institute strategic consultant and Georgetown 
government PhD), FORBES, Jan. 2, 2015 retrieved May 3, 2015 from 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/lorenthompson/2015/01/02/why-putins-russia-is-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/lorenthompson/2015/01/02/why-putins-russia-is-the-]
biggest-threat-to-america-in-2015/. A nuclear arsenal on hair trigger. Between the two of them, Russia and America control over 90% of the world's nuclear weapons. However, Moscow is far more dependent on its nuclear arsenal for security, because it cannot afford to keep up with U.S. investments in new warfighting technology. So Russian military doctrine states that it might be necessary to use nuclear weapons to combat conventional attacks from the West. Many Russians think that attacks on their country are a real possibility, and that their nuclear deterrent  --  which consists mainly of silo-based missiles in known locations  --  might have to be launched quickly to escape a preemptive strike. Moscow staged a major nuclear exercise during 
last year's Ukraine crisis in which it assumed missiles would have to be launched fast 
on warning of a Western attack. A senior Russian officer has stated that 96% of the strategic rocket force can be launched within minutes. 
1848. Loren Thompson, (Lexington Institute strategic consultant and Georgetown 
government PhD), FORBES, Jan. 2, 2015 retrieved May 3, 2015 from 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/lorenthompson/2015/01/02/why-putins-russia-is-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/lorenthompson/2015/01/02/why-putins-russia-is-the-]
biggest-threat-to-america-in-2015/. A collapsing economy. Much of Putin's popularity within Russia is traceable to the impressive recovery of the post-Soviet economy on his watch. Since he came to power in 2001, the country's gross domestic 
product has grown sixfold, greatly increasing the size and affluence of the Russian 
middle class. But that growth has been based in large part on the export of oil and gas to neighboring countries at a time when energy prices reached record highs. Now the price of oil has fallen at the same time that economic sanctions are beginning to bite. The ruble lost nearly half its value against the dollar last year, and the economy has begun to shrink. Putin blames sanctions for 25-30% of current economic hardships. Many Westerns believe a prolonged recession would weaken Putin's support, but because he can blame outsiders, economic troubles might actually strengthen his hand and accelerate the trend toward authoritarian rule. 
other words, the only reason Washington seems to have the upper hand right now is 
because it assumes leaders in Moscow will act --rationally.‖ 
1851. Loren Thompson, (Lexington Institute strategic consultant and Georgetown 
government PhD), FORBES, Jan. 2, 2015 retrieved May 3, 2015 from 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/lorenthompson/2015/01/02/why-putins-russia-is-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/lorenthompson/2015/01/02/why-putins-russia-is-the-]
biggest-threat-to-america-in-2015/. The unspoken wisdom in Washington today is that if nobody gives voice to such fears, then they don't need to be addressed. That's how a peaceful world stumbled into the First World War a century ago  --  by not acknowledging the worst-case potential of a crisis in Eastern Europe  --  and the blindness of leaders back then explains most of what went wrong later in the 20th Century. If we want to avoid the risk of reliving that multi-generation lesson, then 
U.S. policymakers need to do something more than simply wait for Putin to crack. 
That day will never come. In the near term, Washington needs to work harder to defuse tensions, including taking a more serious look at the history that led to Moscow's move on Crimea. Over the longer term, Washington needs to get beyond its dangerous aversion to building real defenses against long-range nuclear weapons, because it is just a matter of time before some dictator calls America's bluff. 
1852. Jessica Perkinson, (American University International Services masters), 
WASHINGTON RESEARCH LIBRARY CONSORTIUM, 2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer  [HYPERLINK: http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer]ican_0008N_10238display.pdf?sequence=1. South Korea's dependence on China's continued stability is twofold. Not only does South Korea rely on China's continued deterrence of North Korean aggression both through diplomacy and satisfaction of their trade needs, but they also rely on China as a trade partner. For example, on November 23, 2010, North Korea fired dozens of missiles onto the South's Yeonpyeong Island, killing two South Korean soldiers, significantly escalating tension on the Peninsula as South Korea threatened military retaliation for the attack. In response, China focused their energy on deterring an armed response by the South Koreans, which could have potentially led to protracted civil war between the two countries. Though the international community has expressed deep disagreement with China's soft-line approach toward North Korea, it appears their understanding, ‗big- brother' style of handling North Korean aggression toward South Korea has at least prevented a violent, protracted conflict, though not necessarily further North Korean acts of aggression. Not only does South Korea rely on the continued intervention of the Chinese in North-South relations, but they have a deep economic integration and dependence on Chinese trade. For example, in 2010, South Korea was China's fourth-largest trading partner, exchanging goods of $207.2 billion, up 32.6% over 2009. In other words, both North and South Korea rely heavily on China not only for their continued economic prosperity, but also for the survival of their people and territorial security. Should the Chinese government undergo a period of reform and instability great enough to interrupt these benefits to the Korean Peninsula, the international system may be faced with a serious nuclear and conventional military conflict between North and South Korea. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	14 7 
 
 
 
1853. Jessica Perkinson, (American University International Services masters), WASHINGTON RESEARCH LIBRARY CONSORTIUM, 2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer  [HYPERLINK: http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer]ican_0008N_10238display.pdf?sequence=1. A second region that relies heavily on the continued stability of China's government is the island of Taiwan. Because China and Taiwan have a long history of conflict over the status of Taiwan's sovereignty, maintenance of stability in the Taiwan Strait continues to be an issue of critical interest to the international community as a whole. For example, in 1995, the third Taiwan Strait Crisis occurred in response to what may seem like a small event to the international community, but what was viewed by the Chinese as a grave threat to their sovereignty. In 1995, then-US President Bill Clinton allowed Taiwanese President Lee Teng-Hui to come and visit his alma-mater at Cornell University. Though the visit alone sparked some controversy between the US, China and Taiwan, the remarks made at Cornell by Lee Teng-Hui during an address tipped the security balance on the Taiwan Strait. In his address, Lee referred to Taiwan as the --Republic of China‖ on multiple occasions, and made references to --nation‖ and --country‖. These events led the Chinese leadership to believe that the US was making overtures toward Taiwanese independence from the mainland. The following year, the PLA fired missiles off the coast of Taiwan, nearly drawing the international community - including the US - into a conflict on the Strait. Some scholars argue this was to deter the US from developing closer ties with Taiwan. However, since that incident, the Strait has remained relatively calm and stable, as the Taiwanese leadership under Ma Ying-jeou has remained very moderate in their stance on China-Taiwan relations and has been very careful not to make any inflammatory statements that could set off conflict on the Strait. 
1854. Jessica Perkinson, (American University International Services masters), 
WASHINGTON RESEARCH LIBRARY CONSORTIUM, 2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer  [HYPERLINK: http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer]ican_0008N_10238display.pdf?sequence=1. However, a period of significant reform within the CCP could lend itself to instability on the Taiwan Strait. There is no guarantee that pro-independence factions within Taiwan would not take advantage of the CCP and PLA's distraction with their own transformation to take dramatic, perhaps militaristic, steps toward independence. For example, during Taiwan's most recent election cycle, the pro-independence candidate Tsai Ing-wen, though she lost the election, garnered enough support to make the government in mainland China nervous about her rise in support. The potential destabilization of the Taiwan Strait could spell disaster for the entire region, as other countries and allies could be pulled into a protracted conflict between the two regions. 
1855. Jessica Perkinson, (American University International Services masters), 
WASHINGTON RESEARCH LIBRARY CONSORTIUM, 2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer  [HYPERLINK: http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer]ican_0008N_10238display.pdf?sequence=1. In addition, Japan and China continue to disagree over the status of some hotly contested territories, including the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands. Not only do both countries have a territorial claim to the islands, but the area contains vast amounts of oil and natural gas resources that both countries want to develop. For example, it is estimated that the Japanese side of the disputed East China Sea area contains up to 500 million kiloliters of crude oil volume. As China is the world's second-largest consumer of oil and Japan third, with Chinese demand for oil expected to rise 14% by 2025, these oil deposits are of crucial national security interest to both countries. Tension in the region has been rising as China has continued to press closer to the median line that Japan has drawn around the islands, at one point coming as close as five kilometers from the line. The consistency of the Chinese message on the status of these disputed territories, though tense and combative for the Japanese, have at least lent a level of predictability to China's stance and actions. However, should the CCP undergo a period of instability and reform, and if their message or actions were to change regarding the status of these islands, it could cause a significant conflict over these territories between China and Japan, and could severely destabilize an already weakened Japanese economy. Much like the potential destabilization of the Taiwan Strait, the destabilization of the East China Sea region could draw the countries' regional neighbors and international partners into a protracted conflict between the two nations. 
1856. Jessica Perkinson, (American University International Services masters), 
WASHINGTON RESEARCH LIBRARY CONSORTIUM, 2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer  [HYPERLINK: http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer]ican_0008N_10238display.pdf?sequence=1. A fourth region that would be negatively affected by political destabilization in China is their southern neighbor, India. Though China and India are becoming increasingly reliant on one another economically, they still suffer from a number of serious areas of conflict, including a hotly contested border area and India's support of the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan government-in- exile. In 1962, the PLA invaded India through the Arunachal Pradesh region, laying claim to portions of the Himalayas that had previously been under Indian control in what became known as the Sino-Indian War. Though the Chinese eventually called a cease-fire and withdrew from the region, the conflict over it remains tense for a number of reasons, including access to water resources, forestry resources and China's enduring theme of territorial integrity. Similar to the destabilization of the two regions mentioned above, the inconsistency of China's message during a time of political destabilization or reform could lead the Indian military to either panic from the unpredictability of China's potential actions or move to take the Arunachal Pradesh region by force. 


1857. Jessica Perkinson, (American University International Services masters), WASHINGTON RESEARCH LIBRARY CONSORTIUM, 2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer  [HYPERLINK: http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer]ican_0008N_10238display.pdf?sequence=1. Not only could political instability in China cause a border conflict between India and China, but it could also cause an influx of Tibetans into the country, as India's government is sympathetic to the Tibetan plight. Though China has labeled the Dalai Lama and his government-in- exile a separatist force working to separate Tibet from mainland China, India has provided the group sanctuary in Dharamsala, India. Abroad, the Dalai Lama continues to draw supporters from around the world, occasionally attracting Tibetans inside Tibet to make the treacherous journey across the Himalayas to Dharamsala. China, in turn, has taken up guarding this area in an attempt to prevent flows of Tibetans out of Tibet and into India to reach the Dalai Lama. However, should the CCP undergo a period of significant political reform, this could encourage Tibetans to either take advantage of the CCP's distraction to seek independence by force, or could cause massive immigrant flows across the Sino-Indian border. Both China and India already have a regional example of destabilization due to immigrant flows, as China already suffers from this issue on its border with North Korea. 
1858. Jessica Perkinson, (American University International Services masters), 
WASHINGTON RESEARCH LIBRARY CONSORTIUM, 2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer  [HYPERLINK: http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer]ican_0008N_10238display.pdf?sequence=1. In addition, any political stability within the CCP would spell disaster for the Indian economy, which is becoming increasingly reliant on China as a trading partner. Partially as a counterweight to the two nations' conflict, India and China have been dramatically growing their bilateral trade in the last three decades. Though this has served to promote peace in the region and between the two giants in particular, it has also made India increasingly reliant on China's continued stability for its economic prosperity. For example, in 1990, trade between India and China had bottomed out at near $0. However, this figure shot up drastically between 2000 and 2008 to around $35 billion, with no sign of leveling off. It is obvious from these statistics that the two nations continue to build their trade dependency and that India's economy is deeply intertwined with China's. The consistency of China's message on the contested border area, as well as the fairly stable environment surrounding the Tibetan dispute, lend at least some predictability to the disagreement between the two nations. However, if China were to undergo a period of political instability, this series of predictable messages and actions from China on these disagreements could change, and cause aggression from either side, destabilizing the region and India' economy in the process. 
1859. Jessica Perkinson, (American University International Services masters), 
WASHINGTON RESEARCH LIBRARY CONSORTIUM, 2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer  [HYPERLINK: http://aladinrc.wrlc.org/bitstream/handle/1961/10330/Perkinson_amer]ican_0008N_10238display.pdf?sequence=1. Outside of China's immediate vicinity, there exist a number of countries that would be challenged by political instability in China. Due to intense and growing economic and military integration between China, the East Asian region and the world, these other countries have a significant reliance on the continued stability of the CCP. Chief among these global concerns are China's growing integration with European countries and its continued commitment of foreign direct investment (FDI) into developing countries, primarily on the African continent. 
1860. John Brennan, (Lt. Colonel US Army), USAWC CIVILIAN RESEARCH 
PROJECT, Mar. 15, 2012 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://nsfp.web.unc.  [HYPERLINK: http://nsfp.web.unc/]edu/files/2012/09/Brennan_UNITED-STATES-COUNTER-TERRORISM-CYBER- LAW-AND-POLICY.pdf. There is conclusive and irrefutable evidence that terrorist organizations such as al Qa'ida in Iraq (AQI) not only recruit, propagandize, coordinate attack s, and finance their activities , but these terror organizations are actively seeking the means to initiate casualty producing kinetic events using the worldwide web as well. Groups such as the Muslim Hackers Club have developed their own software and tutorials in order to sabotage not only U. S. computer networks, but to also seek to cause the physical destruction of key American infrastructure. ADM Michael Mullen, then Chair man of the Joint Chiefs of Staff described cyber terrorism as one of two existential threats to U. S. national security, the other being the Russian nuclear threat. Additionally, the intelligence community (IC) writ large considers cyber attacks as the most prominent, long term threat to the country. Deputy Secretary of Defense William J. Lynn III similarly suggests that terrorists are seeking to effectively weaponize cyberspace in order to achieve kinetic effects against key U. S. infrastructure . 
1861. Michael Hirsh, (Politico Magazine national editor), NATIONAL JOURNAL, 
Nov. 14, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal. com/magazine/the-next-bin-laden-20131114. The truth is much grimmer. Intelligence officials and terrorism experts today believe that the death of bin Laden and the decimation of the Qaida --core‖ in Pakistan only set the stage for a rebirth of al-Qaida as a global threat. Its tactics have morphed into something more insidious and 
increasingly dangerous as safe havens multiply in war-torn or failed states -- at 
exactly the moment we are talking about curtailing the National Security Agency's monitoring capability. And the jihadist who many terrorism experts believe is al- Qaida's new strategic mastermind, Abu Musab al-Suri (a nom de guerre that means --the Syrian‖), has a diametrically different approach that emphasizes quantity over quality. The red-haired, blue-eyed former mechanical engineer was born in Aleppo in 1958 as Mustafa Setmariam Nasar; he has lived in France and Spain. Al-Suri is believed to have helped plan the 2004 train bombings in Madrid and the 2005 
bombings in London -- and has been called the --Clausewitz‖ of the new al-Qaida. 
1862. Michael Hirsh, (Politico Magazine national editor), NATIONAL JOURNAL, 
Nov. 14, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal. com/magazine/the-next-bin-laden-20131114. Whereas bin Laden preached big dramatic acts directed by him and senior Qaida leaders, al-Suri urges the creation of self-generating cells of lone terrorists or small groups in his 1,600-page Internet manifesto. They are to keep up attacks, like multiplying fleas on a dog that finds itself endlessly distracted -- and ultimately dysfunctional. (A classic Western book on guerrilla warfare called The War of the Flea reportedly influenced al-Suri.) The attacks are to culminate, he hopes, in acts using weapons of mass destruction. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	14 8 
 
 
 
1863. Michael Hirsh, (Politico Magazine national editor), NATIONAL JOURNAL, Nov. 14, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal. com/magazine/the-next-bin-laden-20131114. Experts and scholars of jihad have been tracking al-Suri's rise for years. A few days after bin Laden's death in 2011, John Arquilla, an intelligence expert at the Naval Postgraduate School, penned a prescient essay in Foreign Policy titled --The New Seeds of Terror.‖ He wrote that the U.S. operation facilitated the Qaida resurrection by settling a doctrinal battle within the organization between the older --sheik‖ and his upstart critic, al-Suri. Bin Laden's killing only accelerated al-Qaida's transformation from a top-down hierarchy to a looser (and more elusive) network of self-motivated cells. --Bin Laden's death was the bell that sounded the new phase,‖ Arquilla says today. --Abu Musab al-Suri's ideas in his call to global Islamic resistance were just taking root, but bin Laden was deeply opposed to al-Suri's ideas.‖ These ideas don't involve complex, ongoing, multinational plans developed for long periods over international phone and email lines. They often are seat-of-the-pants, Boston Marathon-type plots that are often virtually unknown ahead of time, because the plotters are few and typically self- motivated rather than directed from above. They can occur in random places with almost no forewarning. And the consensus of senior defense and intelligence officials in the U.S. government is that NSA surveillance may well be the only thing that can stop the next terrorist from blowing apart innocent Americans, as happened in Boston last April. --Al-Qaida is far more a problem a dozen years after 9/11 than it was back then,‖ Arquilla says. 
1864. Mary Habeck, (Foreign Policy Research Institute senior fellow), INSITE 
BLOG, Dec. 12, 2014, retrieved April 10, 2014 from http://news.siteintel  [HYPERLINK: http://news.siteintel/]
group.com/blog/index.php/entry/333-the-islamic-state-and-al-qaeda-possible- 
directions-for-2015-1. The entire AQ network, meanwhile, has been growing around the world. The recent assault by the al-Nusra Front on the Syrian opposition, seizure 


1869. Wayne McCormack, (Utah law professor), SJ QUINNEY COLLEGE OF LAW, Aug. 20, 2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://law.utah.edu/u-s-judicial-  [HYPERLINK: http://law.utah.edu/u-s-judicial-]independence-victim-in-the-war-on-terror/. One of the principal victims in the U.S. so-called --war on terror‖ has been the independence of the U.S. Judiciary. Time and again, challenges to assertedly illegal conduct on the part of government officials have been turned aside, either because of overt deference to the Government or 
because of special doctrines such as state secrets and standing requirements. The 
judiciary has virtually relinquished its valuable role in the U.S. system of judicial review. In the face of governmental claims of crisis and national security needs, the courts have refused to examine, or have examined with undue deference, the actions of government officials. 
1870. Curtis Bradley, (Duke public policy studies professor), LAWFARE, Sept. 2, 
2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/2013/09/war-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/2013/09/war-]
powers-syria-and-non-judicial-precedent/. As an initial matter, we need to bracket the 
issue of whether Obama's action will weaken his own power as a political matter. This is a complicated issue: on the one hand, it may signal weakness both to Congress and to other nations; on the other hand, if he obtains congressional authorization, he may be in an ultimately stronger political position, as Jack Goldsmith has pointed out. As I understand it, the claim being made by Spiro, Rothkopf, and others is that the power of the presidency more generally is being weakened. How might this happen? Not through an influence on judicial doctrine: Although courts sometimes take account of historic governmental practices when assessing the scope of presidential 
authority, they have consistently invoked limitations on standing and ripeness, as well 
as the political question doctrine, to avoid addressing constitutional issues relating to war powers. 
1871. Peter Margulies, (Rogers Williams law professor), HASTINGS LAW 

of territory in Idlib and near Damascus, spread of al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula 
JOURNAL, 
Sept. 
10, 
2014 
retrieved 
April 
16, 
2015 
from 

(AQAP), multiplication of AQ-linked groups (and their growing power) in Libya, as 
well as the creation and attacks by al-Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent (AQIS), all 
suggest a group that is aggressively expanding its reach and capabilities. For AQ high command and various branches, at least four possible directions and two terrorist opportunities emerge. As with the aforementioned possibilities for IS, some of these could happen simultaneously. 1) AQ and IS merge into a new organization dominated by AQ's High Command in Afghanistan-Pakistan. 2) Al-Nusra Front, in cooperation with other groups, takes Damascus and declares an Emirate in Syria. 3) AQAP seizes control of Aden and most of southern Yemen, then launches an assault on the capital of Sana'a and the Houthis. 4) As the U.S. draws down in Afghanistan, AQ is able to reestablish a safe haven in that country. The two terrorist possibilities include the 
most dangerous courses of action in the near-term: 1) AQIS carries out a mass 
casualty attack on India. 2) Through the --Khorasan Group,‖ AQ manages to carry out a terrorist attack against the U.S. or Europe. 
1865. James Phillips, (Heritage Foundation fellow), HERITAGE FOUNDATION, 
Jan. 21, 2015, retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://www.heritage.org/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.heritage.org/]
research/commentary/2015/1/isis-vs-al-qaeda-the-good-news-and-the-bad-news). The 
bottom line is that Al Qaeda and ISIS increasingly are competing for recruits, funding and leadership of the global Islamist revolution. The good news is that this power 
struggle may weaken both of them. The bad news is that their rivalry may spark a 
competition to see who can launch the most spectacular terrorist attacks against 
Western targets. Moreover, Syria has emerged as a terrorist sanctuary that potentially 
poses a greater threat to the United States than Afghanistan did before 9/11. 
1866. Barak Mendelsohn, (Haverford College political science professor), FOREIGN 
AFFAIRS, Aug. 14, 2014, retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://www.foreignaffairs. 
com/articles/141884/barak-mendelsohn/isis-gruesome-gamble. If the United States decided to step in on behalf of its allies - as it did - then ISIS must have believed that it would be able to strengthen its position within the jihadi camp. ISIS could use the bombings as evidence that the United States is waging a war on Islam, and to portray itself as the defender of Muslims from --Crusader‖ aggression. In other words, ISIS would steal a page right out of al Qaeda's playbook. And that puts more pressure on 
al Qaeda. After all, if ISIS wins vast territory in the heart of the Middle East, 
implements Islamic governance, and battles apostate regimes and their backers, al Qaeda will - after refusing to do so - have to give its full support to ISIS. Already, ISIS supporters are calling all jihadi forces to stand behind Omar al-Baghdadi, the leader of ISIS. As a result, the flow of fighters abandoning al Qaeda affiliates to join ISIS, which U.S. intelligence has already observed, is likely to increase. Moreover, leaders of al Qaeda franchises will come under greater pressure to shift allegiance from al Qaeda to ISIS. 
1867. Jonathan Entin, (Case Western law professor), CASE WESTERN RESERVE 
JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW, Fall 2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from 
http://law.case.edu/journals/JIL/Documents/45CaseWResJIntlL1&2.21.Article.Entin.  [HYPERLINK: http://law.case.edu/journals/JIL/Documents/45CaseWResJIntlL1%262.21.Article.Entin]pdf. Although these procedural and jurisdictional barriers to judicial review can be overcome, those who seek to limit what they regard as executive excess in military and foreign affairs should not count on the judiciary to serve as a consistent ally. The Supreme Court has shown substantial deference to the president in national security cases. Even when the Court has rejected the executive's position, it generally has 
done so on relatively narrow grounds. 
1868. Kim Lane Scheppele, (Princeton public affairs professor), BOSTON 
UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, January 2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from Lexis. This new form of judicial deference has created a slow-motion brake on the race into 
a constitutional abyss. But these decisions give the government leeway to tackle 
urgent threats without having to change course right away with respect to the 
treatment of particular individuals. New deference, then, is a mixed bag. It creates the 
appearance of doing something - an appearance not entirely false in the long run - while doing far less in the present to bring counter-terrorism policy back under the 
constraint of constitutionalism. 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2400809. Mindful [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2400809] of these 
concerns, both the FISCR and the Supreme Court may well resist hearing FISC certifications on the merits. Separating factual issues from purely legal points will be 
difficult, since so much turns on the continually changing nature of communications. 
Because of the pace of technological change, even a record compiled a year before an 
appellate decision may be obsolete. Deciding a case without any record, as 
certification requires, would be an exercise in rank speculation. Other questions mix law and fact from the outset. As an example, consider the question of whether a 
--specific selection term‖ could be a particular hotel server, when the intelligence 
agency believes that a terrorist has been a guest at the hotel but may be using a 
previously unknown email account. That question could turn on factual matters, such 
as the NSA's capacity to retrieve the information through other, less restrictive means. As a mixed question of law and fact, this issue would be unsuited to 
certification. In short, although the Leahy bill's reliance on certification signals that 
Congress wants more review of FISC decisions, it is far from clear that certification 
will achieve that goal. 
1872. Sudha Setty, (Western New England University law professor), STANFORD 
JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW, Winter 2015, retrieved April 19, 2015 from Lexis. Although Congress could launch a large-scale investigation into the programs Snowden disclosed, like the Church Committee in its time, its ability to serve effectively as an ongoing accountability mechanism over intelligence gathering in the manner of a parliament seems unlikely. For the political and structural reasons discussed above, the apparatus of national security policy-making is somewhat intentionally insulated from Congress. On the one hand, the benefit of this structural arrangement is that it may facilitate expertise and efficient decision-making, but a key effect is also that this apparatus is not really accessible to the other branches of government or the public. This consolidation of decision-making authority in the executive branch, plus the difference between congressional and parliamentary access to executive branch information, accounts for a different potential for legislative oversight in the United States as compared to the United Kingdom and India. Further, the lack of widespread and sustained public pressure on Congress toward reform suggests that a meaningful increase in legislative oversight of the intelligence community will not occur in the near future. 
1873. Peter Margulies, (Rogers Williams law professor), HASTINGS LAW 
JOURNAL, Sept. 10, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://papers.  [HYPERLINK: http://papers/]
ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2400809. Obliging agencies to return to Congress every time they encounter a new technology can also stifle innovation. In 
today's world, technological change occurs at an astronomical rate. Ponder the 
pitiable fate of the Blackberry, hailed as cutting edge technology in one decade and nearing collapse less than fifteen years later. Even modest alterations in technology can render a regulatory regime ready for mothballs. Requiring a trip to Congress for fresh amendments every time technological change mooted out a previously effective regulatory framework would leave regulators playing Sisyphus. The agency would eagerly draft regulations pursuant to a current statutory authorization, only to find that technological change had rendered those rules old before their time, requiring further legislative activity before starting work on a new batch of regulations. The 
cycle would then repeat itself. Such adventures in futility would seem quixotic were 
they not dangerous. If adaptability is a watchword for administrative law, allowing counterterrorism techniques to lag behind technology in smart phones or washing machines seems perverse. 
1874. John Yoo, (Berkeley law professor), WALL STREET JOURNAL Feb. 7, 2013, 
retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142412788732395  [HYPERLINK: http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142412788732395]
1904578288380180346300. This mind-set is reflected in the leaked Justice 
Department white paper. It could have simply relied on precedent and stated that under the laws of war U.S. military units can kill any enemy soldiers at any time with 
snipers and artillery, drones and missiles, as well as at closer quarters. U.S. 
citizenship doesn't create a legal force field around Americans who treasonously join 
the enemy. During the Civil War, every Confederate soldier remained a U.S. citizen. 
In World War II, Americans joined the Axis. As the Supreme Court reaffirmed in 
Hamdi v. Rumsfeld (2004), --Citizens who associate themselves with the military arm 
of the enemy government . . . are enemy belligerents.‖ But instead of relying on the traditional authority to kill the enemy, the leaked memo reveals how a legal fog 
threatens to envelop U.S. soldiers and agents on the front lines. The administration 
has replaced the clarity of the rules of war with the vague legal balancing tests that 
govern policemen on the beat. [ellipsis in original] 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	14 9 
 
 
 
1875. John Yoo, (Berkeley law professor), WALL STREET JOURNAL Feb. 7, 2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142412788732395  [HYPERLINK: http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142412788732395]1904578288380180346300. The Bill of Rights establishes a careful set of rules for police conduct. Officers can use deadly force only when there is probable cause to believe a suspect will imminently cause serious bodily harm. The legal system doesn't generally allow the government to stop the potentially dangerous before they commit crimes. The military's mission is quite the opposite. U.S. armed forces and intelligence agencies exist to pre-empt enemy attacks, not to apprehend the guilty afterward. Troops must have the right to use force against enemy armed forces at any time, not merely at the moment before --an operational leader‖ (in the Justice memo's words) seizes a plane or places a bomb. The memo shows that for the first time in the history of American arms, presidential advisers will weigh the due-process rights of enemy combatants on the battlefield against the government's interests, judge an individual's --imminent‖ threat of violence, and ponder whether capture is feasible before deciding to strike. Under these provisions, the U.S. military's speed and decisiveness will suffer, even as the intelligence needed to identify drone targets dries up with the withdrawals from Iraq and now Afghanistan. 
1876. John Yoo, (Berkeley law professor), WALL STREET JOURNAL Feb. 7, 2013, 
retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142412788732395  [HYPERLINK: http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142412788732395]
1904578288380180346300. While suggesting that al Qaeda terrorists have constitutional rights, the memo makes no room for judicial review of a strike, as would be required for any actual government deprivation of due process. All we have are scarcely believable accounts that Mr. Obama selects targets from CIA lists with the guidance of St. Thomas Aquinas's writings on what constitutes a just war. This 
approach sets a concerning precedent regarding the government's respect for due 
process in future cases involving American citizens and legal residents who actually deserve the right. By including terrorists among those afforded constitutional protections, the president's policy risks stretching those protections a mile wide and an inch deep -- weakening them for all Americans. 
1877. John Bates, (US Courts Administrative Office director), LAWFARE, Jan. 10, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-]
content/uploads/2014/01/1-10-2014-Enclosure-re-FISA.pdf. Practically all FISC 
orders of various types identify the target, either directly or by disclosing target- 
specific information, such as a phone number the target uses. As we understand long- 
standing Executive Branch classification practices, the government typically regards the targets of counterintelligence or international terrorism investigations as classified 
while those investigations are ongoing and for at least several years thereafter. Under 
an approach such as the one recommended by the Review Group, we would 
anticipate that each application would be accompanied by a request for a 
nondisclosure order and that practically all applications would entail successive requests to extend those nondisclosure orders. This new form of request would 
require the government to present, and the FISC to assess, facts and considerations 
that are distinct from whether the proposed collection is warranted and U.S. person 
privacy interests are adequately protected. Without arriving at a policy conclusion, we 
are skeptical that this proposed new process would lead to greater public understanding of the implementation of FISA or other tangible benefits, and whether 
any such benefits are commensurate with the burdens imposed by entertaining a line 
of periodic requests to extend nondisclosure obligations for a large percentage of 
current and former FISA targets. 
1878. Michael Hayden, (former CIA director) WALL STREET JOURNAL, Nov. 17, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.wsj.com/articles/michael-v-hayden-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.wsj.com/articles/michael-v-hayden-]
and-michael-b-mukasey-nsa-reform-that-only-isis-could-love-1416268847. 
Meanwhile, Islamic State terrorists continue to rampage across Syria and Iraq, even as the group, also known as ISIS, uses sophisticated Internet communications to swell its ranks with recruits bearing U.S., Canadian or European passports who can easily slip back into their native countries and wreak havoc. In that threat environment, one would think that the last thing on the --to do‖ list of the 113th Congress would be to add to the grim news. Yet Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid has announced that he will bring to the floor the extravagantly misnamed USA Freedom Act, a major new bill exquisitely crafted to hobble the gathering of electronic intelligence. For starters, 
the bill ends the National Security Agency's bulk collection of what is called 
telephone metadata. This includes the date, time, duration and telephone numbers for all calls, but not their content or the identity of the caller or called, and is information already held by telephone companies. The bill would substitute a cumbersome and untried process that would require the NSA, when it seeks to check on which telephone numbers have called or been called by a number reasonably associated with terrorist activity, to obtain a warrant from the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, or FISA court, and then scurry to each of the nation's telephone-service providers to comb through the information that remains in their hands rather than in the NSA's. 
1879. John Bates, (US Courts Administrative Office director), LAWFARE, Jan. 10, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-]
content/uploads/2014/01/1-10-2014-Enclosure-re-FISA.pdf. Section 501 - Bulk Call Detail Records: Some proposals call for elimination of bulk production to the government of call detail records under Section 501. See, e.g., Review Group Report at 86-89, 115-19. If the bulk production of such records were eliminated, we anticipate that the government would bring to the FISC many more particularized 
applications for productions of such records or, as envisioned by the Review Group, 
for authorization to query bulk metadata retained in private hands. Id. at 115, 118- 
119. Others have considered preserving the government's ability to obtain bulk 
production of call detail records, provided that the FISC would review the substantive basis for querying that information (either before or after the fact). Any of these variations would impose significant new burdens on the FISC. 
1880. John Bates, (US Courts Administrative Office director), LAWFARE, Jan. 10, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-]
content/uploads/2014/01/1-10-2014-Enclosure-re-FISA.pdf. Moreover, even if one 
assumes that adequate resources can be made available to the FISC to handle the 
sheer volume of new cases without compromising the district court work of FISC 
judges, jurisdiction over 21,000 NSL requests per year would transform the FISC 
from an institution that is primarily focused on a relatively small number of cases that 
involve the most intrusive or expansive forms of intelligence collection to one primarily engaged in processing a much larger number of more routine, subpoena- 
type cases. We fear that such a drastic shift of emphasis would diminish the FISC's 
effectiveness in adjudicating and overseeing cases involving electronic surveillance, 
physical search or Section 702 acquisitions. 


1881. John Bates, (US Courts Administrative Office director), LAWFARE, Jan. 10, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-]
content/uploads/2014/01/1-10-2014-Enclosure-re-FISA.pdf. Others have proposed changes to NSL requirements that would also have substantial, albeit less direct, effects on the FISC's caseload. For example, requiring an NSL to disclose to the receiving party the factual predicate for issuing the NSL would implicate 
investigative information that the FBI presumably would have good operational 
security reasons not to disclose in national security cases, regardless of how well- supported the NSL may be. These changes would likely result in the government's decreasing its reliance on NSLs for records subject to such a disclosure requirement and instead bringing to the FISC more applications under Section 501 for production 
of such records, in order to avoid disclosure of such information to private parties. 
1882. Michael Hayden, (former CIA director) WALL STREET JOURNAL, Nov. 17, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.wsj.com/articles/michael-v-hayden-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.wsj.com/articles/michael-v-hayden-]
and-michael-b-mukasey-nsa-reform-that-only-isis-could-love-1416268847. 
Nonetheless, this new bill would establish a permanent advocate appointed by the court to oppose the government's applications before the FISA court. This provision has elicited an extraordinary written objection from a former presiding judge of the FISA court. U.S. District Judge John D. Bates points out that the presence of such an advocate, who cannot conceivably be aware of all the facts, would simply add to the burdens of the court and could wind up sacrificing both national security and privacy. This bill redefines the FISA court, which was never meant to be an adversary tribunal 
and was imposed simply as an added safeguard in the 1970s, without regard to its 
history or its purpose. Worse, it is a three-headed constitutional monster: It is a violation of both the separation of powers principle and the Constitution's appointments clause by having judges rather than the president appoint the public advocate, and then it has the advocate litigate against the Justice Department when both executive offices are supposed to be controlled by the president. 
1883. John Bates, (US Courts Administrative Office director), LAWFARE, Jan. 10, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-]
content/uploads/2014/01/1-10-2014-Enclosure-re-FISA.pdf. Because much of the material reviewed by the FISC is highly classified, its work generally must be performed in a Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility (SCIF). FISC quarters in Washington, D.C., including office space and a court room (which are also shared by the Court of Review), are within such a SCIF. In contrast, a lack of secure communication and storage facilities makes it very difficult for eight of the eleven judges to review FISC pleadings or communicate about FISC matters when they are in their home districts. The large majority of FISC cases are handled by the duty 
judge within one week while in Washington (though preparatory work by Court staff 
often commences during the prior week). More complex or time-consuming matters are sometimes handled by judges outside of the duty-week rotation, at the discretion of the Presiding Judge. FISC judges currently have substantial flexibility in deciding how best to receive from the government information they consider relevant to a particular case. Formal hearings are conducted when necessary. On the other hand, when deemed appropriate by a judge (for example, in a time-sensitive matter), the FISC may request or receive information from the applicant informally through its legal staff. This range of options enables the FISC duty judge to routinely entertain 
40 or more applications in a typical week. In keeping with the ex parte nature of the 
proceedings, the government generally responds to these inquiries with a high degree of candor; indeed, the government routinely discloses in an application information that is detrimental to its case. This candor is also essential to the FISC's ability to discharge its responsibilities. 
1884. John Bates, (US Courts Administrative Office director), LAWFARE, Jan. 10, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-]
content/uploads/2014/01/1-10-2014-Enclosure-re-FISA.pdf. Introducing an advocate 
into a substantial number of FISC proceedings would likely slow down and complicate the Court's information-gathering and consideration of these fact- intensive cases. Under current FISC rules and practice, in non-emergency cases the government is required to submit proposed applications to the FISC within seven days of when it seeks to have the final application ruled upon. In order for an independent advocate to have a meaningful opportunity to review an application, decide whether he wishes to participate in its consideration, and prepare and submit views to the FISC, and for the FISC to consider the advocate's submission together with the application, the government would have to submit a proposed application 
substantially earlier than the present seven-day period. That requirement would likely 
conflict with the government's interest and the public's interest to obtain expedited consideration of an application or of successive applications when necessary to respond to a rapidly evolving threat. Moreover, even relatively routine national security investigations often involve changing facts, such that proposed applications would frequently require change or supplementation. This process of keeping the FISC and the advocate apprised of changing circumstances over a longer period of time would be cumbersome and time-consuming. 
1885. John Bates, (US Courts Administrative Office director), LAWFARE, Jan. 10, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-]
content/uploads/2014/01/1-10-2014-Enclosure-re-FISA.pdf. This prolonged period of consideration in routine cases would also complicate the assignment of matters to FISC judges because such proceedings would likely extend beyond a judge's normal duty week. The more cases in which an advocate is involved, the more likely it would be that the Court would have to modify its current practice of having each FISC judge sit for one week at a time. A different approach, requiring a judge to engage with 
FISC matters for longer periods, is likely to require more time away from judges' 
home districts, to the detriment of their regular district court work. The difficulties of such a process would be exacerbated by the need to interact on equal terms with the applicant and the advocate. In order for the FISC to abide by the procedural and ethical requirements that apply in adversarial proceedings, and for the advocate to appear on equal footing with the applicant, the FISC would have to ensure that the advocate was involved in all such interactions in any case in which the advocate may participate (or, if the advocate must seek leave to participate from the FISC, perhaps only in those cases where such a request is pending or has been granted). We expect 
that the logistical challenges of administering such a three-way process for more than 
a handful of cases would be considerable. And even if it were appropriate under the terms of a specific enactment to limit the involvement of the advocate in such interactions to cases where the advocate has sought or received leave to participate, the FISC may well need to ensure that the advocate, upon entering a matter, becomes fully apprised of any interactions that have already occurred. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	15 0 
 
 
 
1886. John Bates, (US Courts Administrative Office director), LAWFARE, Jan. 10, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-]
content/uploads/2014/01/1-10-2014-Enclosure-re-FISA.pdf. Perhaps most troubling, however, is our concern that providing an institutional opponent to FISA applications would alter the process in other ways that would be detrimental to the FISC's timely receipt of full and accurate information. As noted above, the current process benefits from the government's taking on - and generally abiding by - a heightened duty of candor to the Court. Providing for an adversarial process in run-of-the-mill, fact- driven cases may erode this norm of governmental behavior, thereby impeding the Court's receipt of relevant facts. (As noted above, the advocate would rarely, if ever, serve as a separate source of factual information.) Instead, intelligence agencies may become reluctant to voluntarily provide to the Court highly sensitive information, or information detrimental to a case, because doing so would also disclose that information to a permanent bureaucratic adversary. This reluctance could diminish the Court's ability to receive relevant information, thereby undermining the quality of its decisions. In some cases, that reluctance could result in those agencies' opting not to pursue potentially valuable intelligence-gathering operations governed by FISA in order to protect extremely sensitive intelligence methods or targets from disclosure to that adversary. 
1887. John Bates, (US Courts Administrative Office director), LAWFARE, Jan. 10, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-]
content/uploads/2014/01/1-10-2014-Enclosure-re-FISA.pdf. As a practical matter, a full-time advocate empowered to seek reconsideration in the FISC and to appeal decisions to the Court of Review would significantly impact the operations of both Courts. An increased number of reconsideration requests would pose scheduling and logistical challenges in the FISC's current mode of operations. FISC judges 
frequently rule on cases toward the end of their duty week, so in many cases it is 
highly unlikely that an advocate's request for reconsideration would even be filed before a sitting judge from a district outside of the District of Columbia area returned to his or her district. As a result, judges would need to arrange their regular district court schedules to allow for an additional, return trip to Washington in the event a request for reconsideration were filed. If requests for reconsideration became sufficiently common, the FISC would likely need to reexamine its current one-week rotation schedule. Either approach would negatively affect judges' ability to perform their district court duties. 
1888. Michael Hirsh, (Politico Magazine national editor), NATIONAL JOURNAL, 
Dec. 22, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.national 
journal.com/defense/nsa-panel-member-recommends-increased-data-collection- 
20131222. --Although this process might be less efficient for the government, NSA 
Director General Keith Alexander informed the Review Group that NSA itself has seriously considered moving to a model in which the data are held by the private 
sector,‖ the report said. But Morell emphasized in a separate appearance on CBS's 
Face the Nation on Sunday that these procedures would slow down necessary data 
collection by only a few days, and that the panel has called for an emergency 
exception that would allow the NSA to occasionally bypass a Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court judge. 
1889. Sudha Setty, (Western New England University law professor), STANFORD 
JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW, Winter 2015, retrieved April 19, 2015 from Lexis. The surveillance and data collection that are part of the NSA Metadata Program have been largely validated by two forms of relatively weak judicial review: Article III courts have, until recently, largely refused to hear the merits of cases challenging the government surveillance, instead finding that plaintiffs are unable to satisfy the standing requirement, or dismissing suits at the pleadings stage due to invocations of the state secrets privilege by the government. The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC), tasked with determining the legality of many of the government's surveillance requests, has largely acquiesced to the government's requests over the years. Cases litigated after the Snowden revelations of June 2013 suggest, however, that the judicial deference offered to the government in many previous counterterrorism cases may be curtailed in light of public attention and critique of the NSA Metadata Program, as well as a reinvigorated judicial embrace of the privacy protections embodied in the Fourth Amendment. 
1890. Eric Streuning, (American University JD), NATIONAL SECURITY LAW 
BRIEF, Nov. 23, 2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.nationalsecurity 
lawbrief.com/is-the-state-secrets-privilege-too-powerful/. Although courts decide if the State Secrets Privilege applies, a great deference is ultimately given to the Executive branch because the matter involves national security. Courts --surely cannot legitimately find [them]selves second guessing the Executive in this arena.‖ 
Mohamed v. Jeppesen Dataplan, Inc., 614 F.3d 1070, 1081 (9th Cir. 2010) (en banc) 
cert. denied, 131 S. Ct. 2442 (U.S. May 16, 2011). This deference typically leads the court to accept the government's assertion of the privilege, and the privilege ultimately leads the government to obtain outright dismissals of case, taking the case out of the litigants' hands. 
1891. Daniel Abebe and Aziz Z. Huq, (Chicago assistant law professors), 
VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW, April 2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from Lexis. 
Therefore, when the United States confronts a multipolar world, the Supreme Court 
should apply a presumption in favor of the federal government. In a multipolar world, 
the benefits of centralization to national economic prosperity likely outweigh the 
benefits to all but one of the fifty states. The United States does not have the power to leverage its economic or military strength on other countries to pursue its preferences. 
In consequence, the federal government's ability to coordinate the interests of the 
several states and determine appropriate policy is a valuable policy tool. Perhaps 
more ominously, other great powers might strategically exploit conflicts between the 
federal government and the several states. For example, the third-party great power can effectively --divide and conquer‖ by providing the state with some marginal 
benefit (e.g., investment or trade opportunities) that impedes the realization of 
collective goods by the United States. 
1892. Sudha Setty, (Western New England University law professor), STANFORD 
JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW, Winter 2015, retrieved April 19, 2015 from Lexis. These rights-protective perspectives - offered by justices with different political and theoretical perspectives - may offer a preview of a significant jurisprudential shift not only in hearing security-related cases on their merits, but in finding for plaintiffs alleging privacy and civil liberties infringements. However, the historically deferential attitude of courts toward matters of national security, a stance that has only compounded in the post-9/11 context, suggests that this may continue to be an uphill battle for civil libertarians. 


1893. Michael Van Alstine, (Maryland law professor), DUKE LAW JOURNAL, Feb 
2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/  [HYPERLINK: http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/]
cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1526&context=dlj. Few would argue that these regional appellate courts represent an effective medium for ensuring uniform fidelity to the international legal obligations of the United States. The problem, however, is even more acute than it might seem. Nearly all of the precedents in the federal circuit courts come from panels -- not from the entire circuit court sitting en banc. The reason for this fact is the so-called law-of-the-circuit doctrine. Under this doctrine, which controls in every federal circuit, a precedent created by a single, randomly assigned three-judge panel is immediately and absolutely binding throughout the circuit. In the 
rare case in which a subsequent panel misses the message, later panels are obligated 
to follow the first precedent. This doctrine is severe indeed. It prohibits reexamination of the first panel's precedent even in light of subsequent insights from other circuits. The Eleventh Circuit declared this point bluntly in 2000: --The fact that other circuits disagree with [our] analysis is irrelevant. To be sure, the possibility of en banc review remains; but even this option by rule is not favored and ordinarily will not be 
ordered.‖ 
1894. Jameel Jaffer, (ACLU deputy legal director), HARVARD CIVIL RIGHTS- 
CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW REVIEW, Spring 2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from 
Lexis. When open secrets are accorded judicial sanction, it is typically because of the --official acknowledgement‖ doctrine, which distinguishes facts that are publicly known from facts that the government has expressly confirmed. The theory is that official acknowledgement of a given set of facts can cause harm that is distinct from any harm caused by (for example) media speculation about those facts or the isolated disclosures of officials not authorized to speak. As the Fourth Circuit has written, --[i]t is one thing for a reporter or author to speculate or guess that a thing may be so or even, quoting undisclosed sources, to say that it is so; it is quite another thing for one in a position to know of it officially to say that it is so.‖ Because official acknowledgement can cause distinct harm, the government sometimes has an interest in refusing to confirm facts that the rest of us know to be true. To avoid official acknowledgement, the government withholds information  --  or suppresses it, as it does in the military commissions  --  even when that information is already in the public domain. The practice can seem mad, but there is a method to it. 
1895. Jameel Jaffer, (ACLU deputy legal director), HARVARD CIVIL RIGHTS- 
CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW REVIEW, Spring 2013, retrieved April 14, 2015 from Lexis. The proposition that official acknowledgement may cause distinct harm is 
sometimes plausible. As the D.C. Circuit has observed, public speculation is one 
thing, but official acknowledgement --ends all doubt.‖ A foreign government may feel able to ignore news reports about the CIA's activities within its territory, but unable 
to ignore the CIA's official acknowledgement of those activities. A human source 
may continue to supply the CIA with information after a newspaper has speculated 
about her identity, but not once has the CIA publicly confirmed it. More generally, 
the government's official acknowledgement of publicly reported facts may 
undermine its reputation for reliability and thereby compromise its ability to secure 
the cooperation of sources, foreign governments, and foreign intelligence services in the future. The government has an interest in protecting what the courts have 
sometimes labeled the --appearance of confidentiality.‖ 
1896. Michael Van Alstine, (Maryland law professor), DUKE LAW JOURNAL, Feb 
2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/  [HYPERLINK: http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/]
cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1526&context=dlj. The result is a very real possibility of a localized patchwork of judicial declarations on the nation's rights or obligations under international law. The drama of the directly conflicting pronouncements of the federal circuit courts over whether corporations may be held liable for international human-rights violations bluntly proves this point. To put it mildly, such a system is discordant with the concern for uniformity in this country's dealings with foreign nations' that animated the Constitution's allocation of the foreign relations power to the National Government in the first place. The rigid stare decisis practice of the federal circuit courts also precludes consideration of the exogenous forces of change 
that are of special significance for international-law precedents. And the overlay of 
divergent decisions of other appellate courts may make these forces even more potent. In spite of this difficulty, the law-of-the-circuit principle operates as a nearly absolute bar to examination of subsequent developments in fact and law, the factors that the Supreme Court deems to be --[o]f most relevance‖ for reexamining a precedent. 
1897. Michael Van Alstine, (Maryland law professor), DUKE LAW JOURNAL, Feb 
2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/  [HYPERLINK: http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/]
cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1526&context=dlj. Moreover, the great bulk of lower court precedent is generated without the expertise of, and beyond the attention of. national institutions. It is no slight to observe that with their large, mandatory dockets, these courts may lack the necessary resources, expertise, and international perspectives to appreciate fully their special responsibilities when they first confront a difficult issue of international law. Unlike the Supreme Court, the sheer volume of cases in the circuit courts constrains access to executive-branch expertise, except on rare issues of national significanee. And unlike the certiorari filter for the Supreme 
Court, the federal courts of appeals may not defer decisions on sensitive issues to 
await higher-quality information, better lawyers, or increased attention by national experts. These challenges counsel against overconfidence in a first judicial attempt at a solution and thus recommend an increased openness to reexamining the factual and legal foundations of initial judicial impressions on matters of international law. And given the significance of judicial declarations on the international legal obligations of the United States, lower federal courts should not content themselves with the quality of arguments, factual and legal, presented by the lawyers who happen to appear before them the first time. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	15 1 
 
 
 
1898. Neal Katyal, (Georgetown law professor), STANFORD LAW REVIEW, Feb. 2008, retrieved April 14, 2015 from JSTOR. The courts, for their part, are almost non-actors in such events. Even if a program is disclosed to a journalist, it is likely to be some time before that story is published. The government will implore the newspaper to delay or squelch the story, citing patriotism. If that fails, a promise for exclusive stories about something else may be dangled in front of the reporter. Even if the reporter (and newspaper management) resists all of that and the story eventually runs, it will be very hard for an individual plaintiff opposed to the program to assert standing - to prove that they were actually a target of such surveillance. And even if that hurdle can somehow be overcome, the government may try to block the litigation altogether on the state secrets privilege - claiming the litigation is too much of a threat to the nation's security to be heard in court. And we have not even gotten to the range of other defenses, from political questions to judicial deference for executive branch activity. 
1899. Michael Van Alstine, (Maryland law professor), DUKE LAW JOURNAL, Feb 
2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/  [HYPERLINK: http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/]
cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1526&context=dlj. The result is that judicial precedent in matters of foreign affairs cannot bring the systemic --calm‖ that stare decisis is designed to secure. In this multipolar system, a judgment by any one court cannot control future developments in the system. Contrary to the jurisdictional premises of stare decisis, in other words, an international-law decision by a domestic court is 
subject to immediate and potentially destructive forces of change exogenous to the 
domestic polity. 
1900. Michelle Van Cleave, (former US head of counterintelligence), WORLD 
AFFAIRS, November/December 2013, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.worldaffairsjournal.org/article/what-it-takes-defense-nsa. Is [HYPERLINK: http://www.worldaffairsjournal.org/article/what-it-takes-defense-nsa] our privacy 
being violated when computers churn through billions of strings of digital data 
looking for signals of terrorist activity? Or is that something that we need the 
government to do to keep us safe? Consider the related case of potential cyber attacks 
against critical US infrastructure systems, such as telecommunications, transportation, power generation and distribution, banking, and so forth. Part of a 
national cyber defense would need to include automated access to those computer 
pathways to detect and warn of anomalous activity in the split second needed to take 
action. If these privately owned and operated networks must be monitored to enable 
their protection, is that an intrusion into their customers' autonomy, or an inherent 
duty of government to provide for the common defense? 
1901. Michelle Van Cleave, (former US head of counterintelligence), WORLD 
AFFAIRS, November/December 2013, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.worldaffairsjournal.org/article/what-it-takes-defense-nsa. But [HYPERLINK: http://www.worldaffairsjournal.org/article/what-it-takes-defense-nsa] time has not stood still. China is attacking computer systems throughout the world, stealing 
information and implanting features to enable future control. China's prominence in 
IT commercial markets means that they are in the supply chain, and their market share is growing as part of a purposeful, state-run program for strategic position. A long roll call of spies from Russia, China, Cuba, and other nations have targeted the essential secrets of US intelligence capabilities in order to be able to defeat them. And now they have the Snowdens and the WikiLeakers of the world helping them out. Interconnected global networks of digital data have become the single most important source of intelligence warning of threats, enabling our defense at home and the advancement of freedom abroad. To say --hands off,‖ as some shortsighted privacy advocates have been doing, will not preserve our liberties, it will endanger them. It should be possible for an enlightened citizenry to empower government action in that sphere without forfeiting the very rights that our government exists to secure. That challenge is, at the very least, a part of the continuing experiment that is our democracy. 
1902. Jack Goldsmith, (Harvard law professor), NEW REPUBLIC, Oct. 10, 2013 
retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.newrepublic.com/article/115002/invasive-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.newrepublic.com/article/115002/invasive-]
nsa-will-protect-us-cyber-attacks). The fate of domestic surveillance is today being 
fought around the topic of whether it is needed to stop Al Qaeda from blowing things up. But the fight tomorrow, and the more important fight, will be about whether it is necessary to protect our ways of life embedded in computer networks. Anyone anywhere with a connection to the Internet can engage in cyber-operations within the United States. Most truly harmful cyber-operations, however, require group effort and significant skill. The attacking group or nation must have clever hackers, significant computing power, and the sophisticated software -- known as --malware‖ -- that enables the monitoring, exfiltration, or destruction of information 
inside a computer. The supply of all of these resources has been growing fast for 
many years -- in governmental labs devoted to developing these tools and on sprawling black markets on the Internet. Telecommunication networks are the channels through which malware typically travels, often anonymized or encrypted, and buried in the billions of communications that traverse the globe each day. The targets are the communications networks themselves as well as the computers they connect -- things like the Times' servers, the computer systems that monitor nuclear plants, classified documents on computers in the Pentagon, the Nasdaq Exchange, 


1904. Jack Goldsmith, (Harvard law professor), NEW REPUBLIC, Oct. 10, 2013 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.newrepublic.com/article/115002/invasive-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.newrepublic.com/article/115002/invasive-]nsa-will-protect-us-cyber-attacks). There are two reasons to think that these predictions are wrong and that the government, with extensive assistance from the NSA, will one day intimately monitor private networks. The first is that the cybersecurity threat is more pervasive and severe than the terrorism threat and is 
somewhat easier to see. If the Times' website goes down a few more times and for 
longer periods, and if the next penetration of its computer systems causes large intellectual property losses or a compromise in its reporting, even the editorial page would rethink the proper balance of privacy and security. The point generalizes: As cyber-theft and cyber-attacks continue to spread (and they will), and especially when they result in a catastrophic disaster (like a banking compromise that destroys market confidence, or a successful attack on an electrical grid), the public will demand government action to remedy the problem and will adjust its tolerance for intrusive government measures. At that point, the nation's willingness to adopt some version of 
Alexander's vision will depend on the possibility of credible restraints on the NSA's 
activities and credible ways for the public to monitor, debate, and approve what the NSA is doing over time. 
1905. Jack Goldsmith, (Harvard law professor), LAWFARE, Dec. 19, 2014 retrieved 
April 18, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/12/the-sony-hack-attribution-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/12/the-sony-hack-attribution-]problems-and-the-connection-to-domestic-surveillance/). There are many, many steps the government will need to take to keep our networks more secure, and after the 
Sony attack we can hope to have a more serious debate about what is needed and 
perhaps some more aggressive action. Before he retired, General Alexander is reported to have said: --I can't defend the country until I'm into all the networks.‖ The Sony attack will now make this point more salient. For a natural question now is: How should the U.S. government do a better job of taking intelligence about known prior attacks and using that intelligence proactively to stop future ones? And that in turn will require a conversation about whether, how, and how deeply the NSA and related government agencies should be in the domestic network  --  not for purposes of catching Islamist terrorists, but rather for purposes of protecting our networks from 
other adversaries. 
1906. John Arquilla, (Stanford IR PhD), FOREIGN POLICY, June 7, 2013 retrieved 
April 19, 2015 from http://foreignpolicy.com/2013/06/07/in-defense-of-prism/. And  [HYPERLINK: http://foreignpolicy.com/2013/06/07/in-defense-of-prism/]in the early days of the war against al Qaeda, the enemy was still using means of 
communication that American intelligence had the ability to monitor  --  including 
satellite phones and such  --  leading to several counterterror coups and high-level 
captures. But the network learned quickly and adjusted, becoming far more elusive, 
more dispersed, its cells increasingly attuned to operating independently, its nodes and links ever less visible. It was against this shift that something like PRISM had to 
be mobilized to improve our ability to find the foe whose best, and only real defense 
against us is his capacity for concealment. 
1907. John Arquilla, (Stanford IR PhD), FOREIGN POLICY, June 7, 2013 retrieved 
April 19, 2015 from http://foreignpolicy.com/2013/06/07/in-defense-of-prism/. Thus,  [HYPERLINK: http://foreignpolicy.com/2013/06/07/in-defense-of-prism/]the tantalizing prospect of PRISM, and of the whole --finding effort,‖ is to deny the terrorists the virtual haven that they enjoy throughout the world's telecommunications spaces  --  indeed, throughout the whole of the --infosphere,‖ which includes cyberspace. The piercing of this veil would mark a true turning point in the war on terror, for al Qaeda and other networks simply cannot function with any kind of cohesion, or at any sort of reasonable operational tempo if their communications become insecure. Cells and nodes would be ripped up, operatives killed or captured, and each loss would no doubt yield information that imperiled the network further. Even if al Qaeda resorted to the drastic measure of moving messages, training, and financial information by courier, operations would be so slowed as to cripple the organization. And even couriers can be flagged on --no fly‖ lists or caught boarding tramp steamers and such. 
1908. John Arquilla, (Stanford IR PhD), FOREIGN POLICY, June 7, 2013 retrieved 
April 19, 2015 from http://foreignpolicy.com/2013/06/07/in-defense-of-prism/. So [HYPERLINK: http://foreignpolicy.com/2013/06/07/in-defense-of-prism/] for 
all the furor caused by the PRISM revelations, my simple recommendation is to take a deep breath before crying out in protest. Think first about how the hider/finder dynamic in the war on terror has driven those responsible for our security to bring to bear the big guns of big data on the problem at hand. Think also about whether a willingness to allow some incursions into our privacy might lead to an improved ability to provide for our security, and where that equilibrium point between privacy and security might be. And last, think about the world as it might be without such a 
sustained effort to find the hidden  --  to detect, track, and disrupt the terrorists. That 
would be a world in which they stay on their feet and fighting, and in which they remain secure enough, for long enough, to acquire true weapons of mass destruction. Those of us in the national security business, who know that networks so armed will be far harder to deter than nations ever were, believe that big data approaches like PRISM and its forebears, have been and remain essential elements in the unrelenting and increasingly urgent effort to find the hidden. 

your local bank, and your social-network providers. 
1909. John Brennan, (Lt. Colonel US Army), USAWC CIVILIAN RESEARCH 

                       PROJECT, 
Mar. 
15, 
2012 
retrieved 
April 
19, 
2015 
from 

1903. Jack Goldsmith, (Harvard law professor), NEW REPUBLIC, Oct. 10, 2013 
retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.newrepublic.com/article/115002/invasive-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.newrepublic.com/article/115002/invasive-]
nsa-will-protect-us-cyber-attacks). To keep these computers and networks secure, the 
government needs powerful intelligence capabilities abroad so that it can learn about 
planned cyber-intrusions. It also needs to raise defenses at home. An important first step is to correct the market failures that plague cybersecurity. Through law or 
regulation, the government must improve incentives for individuals to use security 
software, for private firms to harden their defenses and share information with one 
another, and for Internet service providers to crack down on the botnets -- networks of 
compromised zombie computers -- that underlie many cyber-attacks. More, too, must be done to prevent insider threats like Edward Snowden's, and to control the stealth 
introduction of vulnerabilities during the manufacture of computer components --  
vulnerabilities that can later be used as windows for cyber-attacks. And yet that's still 
not enough. The U.S. government can fully monitor air, space, and sea for potential 
attacks from abroad. But it has limited access to the channels of cyber-attack and cyber-theft, because they are owned by private telecommunication firms, and because 
Congress strictly limits government access to private communications. --I can't 
defend the country until I'm into all the networks,‖ General Alexander reportedly told 
senior government officials a few months ago. 
http://nsfp.web.unc.edu/files/2012/09/Brennan_UNITED-STATES-COUNTER-  [HYPERLINK: http://nsfp.web.unc.edu/files/2012/09/Brennan_UNITED-STATES-COUNTER-]
TERRORISM-CYBER-LAW-AND-POLICY.pdf. Speed matters in stopping 
potentially calamitous events, and it is of seminal importance as al Qa'ida and its ilk 
continue to develop more efficient and effective methods of attack. Current trends 
indicate that terrorist organization s such as Lashkar e Ta yyibah (Le T) and al Qa'ida 
in Iraq (AQI) are investing heavily in the education of select members in the fields of computer and electrical engineering. Ayman al Zawahiri counseled deceased AQI 
leader Abu Musab al Zarqawi that half of the battle for Islam should be waged on the 
internet and he constantly stressed to Zarqawi the importance of digital information 
operations. 
1910. Sudha Setty, (Western New England University law professor), STANFORD 
JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW, Winter 2015, retrieved April 19, 2015 from Lexis. Article III courts have consistently been wary of wading into the debate over surveillance, almost always dismissing cases in the post-9/11 context on procedural or secrecy grounds, despite the net effect of precluding even those individuals with concrete evidence that their privacy and civil liberties had been infringed from having their grievances heard. Although the Snowden disclosures have given more purchase to plaintiffs challenging data collection and surveillance, some Article III courts continue to find that plaintiffs have no grounds to stop the NSA's data and metadata collection, retention, and analysis. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	15 2 
 
 
 
1911. Robert Barnsby, (Major, Judge Advocate and law professor), ALABAMA LAW REVIEW, May 1, 2012 retrieved from Lexis. Any release of information of the sort involved in Jeppesen Dataplan will have a chilling effect on informants or the entities with whom they are cooperating. Neither they, nor other individuals or the countries for whom they work will want to work with us. Courts have themselves recognized that --[e]ven a small chance [of risked outing] . . . could . . . cause sources to ‗close up like a clam.'‖ Relatedly, we need to protect those who do business with our intelligence agencies -- particularly those who follow the laws and regulations overseeing their activities -- or they will never have any incentive to do business with us. Additionally, coordination with host nation forces is increasingly required for our intelligence collection efforts. These efforts will be undermined if sources and techniques are revealed. Thankfully, to this point, the majority of these collaborative efforts with other nations and their intelligence agencies have generally worked, as evidenced by the astounding accomplishment of ultimately locating and killing 
Osama bin Laden in 2011. [ellipsis in original] 
1912. Robert Barnsby, (Major, Judge Advocate and law professor), ALABAMA 
LAW REVIEW, May 1, 2012 retrieved from Lexis. One needs to look no further than the first World Trade Center bombing case in the 1990s for a perfect example of the damage done to national security through the course of normal litigation. In that instance, trial discovery and the concomitant public airing of important intelligence information put al Qaeda on notice of United States intelligence on its network and, specifically, led Osama bin Laden to go into hiding. Through normal discovery rules requiring the government to put defendants on notice regarding unindicted co- conspirators, --al Qaeda acquired valuable intelligence from the [conspiracy trial of ten al Qaeda terrorists in 1995].‖ As former Attorney General Michael Mukasey stated in a recent Wall Street Journal article, --bin Laden knew not only that [the United States] knew about him but also who else they knew about.‖ In this way, al Qaeda gathered extremely valuable information from the 1995 trials; having access to this intelligence clearly did not hurt the terror group's ability to inflict the devastating attacks of September 11, 2001. Again, this is something we may be willing to accept in our system -- as the 1995 trials were public -- but at the same time can clearly be a vulnerability to our national defense. If, however, the government is not allowed to protect national security-related information through the SSP in its current form, the situation will be exacerbated. In particular, bad actors and weak states can make up for deficiencies in their intelligence-gathering abilities by gaining --secrets‖ from the government's inability to invoke the SSP. 
1913. Ryan Goodman, (NYU law professor), JUST SECURITY, Dec. 27, 2013 
retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://justsecurity.org/5087/effectiveness-telephony-  [HYPERLINK: http://justsecurity.org/5087/effectiveness-telephony-]
metadata-program/. Some commentators have criticized (if not ridiculed) this 
argument on the ground that it is insufficient, on its own, for retaining the program. 
That would be the case if the --peace of mind metric‖ were an end in itself separate 
from foiling plots. And, indeed, Alexander's and Clapper's testimony have confusingly framed this element as distinct from the --other‖ metric of foiled plots. 
Theoretically, however, this intelligence product could provide timely information 
that enables the government to more effectively stop and respond to an ongoing or 
imminent attack by focusing its limited resources appropriately (on the real threat). In 
efforts to foil an imminent plot, one would presumably value a program that can 
quickly help to eliminate particular scenarios. That said, even if the 215 program 
were able to perform these tasks successfully, the question for the program's survival still boils down to whether it is worth the many tradeoffs. Moreover, the peace of mind metric may be cited as another reason to allow the program to operate only in exigent and emergency situations. 


1916. Michael Hirsh, (Politico Magazine national editor), NATIONAL JOURNAL, Nov. 14, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationaljournal.com/]magazine/the-next-bin-laden-20131114. Intelligence officials who are well briefed in the technical aspects of NSA surveillance also note that global communications are vastly more complex than they were as recently as 9/11, not just in terms of speed and bandwidth but also in the kinds of digital paths they can take. Messages can 
travel partly by air and partly by cable, for example, and the NSA must keep up. --If 
you take the diffuse physical environment [of more failed-state havens] and you layer that with the diffuse communications environment, and then you layer that with the diffuse ideological environment -- more lone wolves, for example -- that makes for a far more generally dangerous environment,‖ says a knowledgeable U.S. government official who asked to remain anonymous. All of which means that despite very legitimate questions about whether the National Security Agency is going beyond what the law and Constitution allow, Americans probably need the NSA now more than ever. 
1917. Michael Hirsh, (Politico Magazine national editor), NATIONAL JOURNAL, 
Nov. 14, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationaljournal.com/]magazine/the-next-bin-laden-20131114. Says Michael Hayden: --People have to understand these actions [against the NSA] will have consequences.‖ He adds that the 
U.S. intelligence community believes that it is mostly on top of the --big, complicated, 
multiple-actor, slow-moving plot [like 9/11]. But [the terrorists] are not doing that 
now. They're into much lower-in-threshold things. Which again demand very good intelligence, very comprehensive intelligence‖ that casts as wide a net as possible around the world. The agency's data-collection strategy is also about detecting, tracking, and disrupting the loose but still lethal network of jihadists and the Islamist preachers who inspire or instruct them in what has become, in al-Suri's conception, the biggest safe haven of all: cyberspace. --If we curtail NSA efforts now,‖ Arquilla 
says, --we give al-Qaida a new lease on life in cyberspace.‖ 
1918. Michael Hirsh, (Politico Magazine national editor), NATIONAL JOURNAL, 
Nov. 14, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationaljournal.com/]
magazine/the-next-bin-laden-20131114. Counterterrorism specialists argue there is no other way than the bulk monitoring of telephone data and the trolling of foreign email to get ahead of such a multiplying and still-mysterious threat. --We have literally thousands of threat streams across Northern Africa, the Middle East, and south and central Asia,‖ says Rogers of the House Intelligence Committee. Challenged for proof, the government has declassified a few successes. NSA officials and their congressional defenders point to the very real threat picked up against U.S. embassies last summer, which could only be clarified using the Patriot Act's Section 
215, which may now be altered. They also cite the case of Najibullah Zazi, an 
Afghan-American who was arrested in 2009 and charged with plotting to blow up the New York subway. The NSA contends it identified Zazi overseas using Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act -- which allows monitoring of email abroad and is another, albeit less controversial, target of anti-NSA efforts -- and then used Section 215 to identify Zazi's potential associates in the U.S. before he could act. --Given that we now had reasonable articulable suspicion of a possible plot by al- Qaida into the homeland, we were able to determine further connections in New York and elsewhere,‖ NSA Deputy Director Inglis testified. --The FBI tracked him as he  
intended to mount a plot which was described as the most significant terrorist plot 
since 9/11.‖ [ellipsis in original] 
1919. Michael Hirsh, (Politico Magazine national editor), NATIONAL JOURNAL, 
Nov. 14, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationaljournal.com/]

                       magazine/the-next-bin-laden-20131114. Officials also say they need 
more 

1914. Michael Hirsh, (Politico Magazine national editor), NATIONAL JOURNAL, 
Dec. 22, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationaljournal.com/]defense/nsa-panel-member-recommends-increased-data-collection-20131222. 
Michael Morell, the former acting director of the CIA and a member of President Obama's task force on surveillance, said in an interview on Sunday that a controversial telephone data-collection program conducted by the National Security Agency should be expanded to include emails. He also said the program, far from 
being unnecessary, could prevent the next 9/11. Morell, seeking to correct any 
misperception that the presidential panel had called for a radical curtailment of NSA programs, said he is in favor of restarting a program the NSA discontinued in 2011 that involved the collection of --metadata‖ for Internet communications. That program gets only a brief mention in a footnote on page 97 of the task-force report, --Liberty and Security in A Changing World.‖ --I would argue actually that the email data is probably more valuable than the telephony data,‖ Morell told National Journal in a telephone interview. --You can bet that the last thing a smart terrorist is going to do 
right now is call someone in the United States.‖ 
1915. Michael Hirsh, (Politico Magazine national editor), NATIONAL JOURNAL, 
Nov. 14, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.nationaljournal.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationaljournal.com/]magazine/the-next-bin-laden-20131114. But the agency's opponents may not realize that the practice they most hope to stop -- its seemingly indiscriminate scouring of phone data and emails -- is precisely what intelligence officials say they need to detect the kinds of plots al-Suri favors. For the foreseeable future, al-Suri's approach will mean more terrorist attacks against more targets -- albeit with a much lower level of 
organization and competence. --It's harder to track. Future attacks against the 
homeland will be less sophisticated and less lethal, but there's just going to be more of them,‖ says Michael Hayden, the former NSA director who steered the agency after 9/11 toward deep dives into Internet and telephonic data. Adds Mike Rogers, chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, --I think al-Qaida's capabilities for a strike into the United States are more dangerous and more numerous than before 9/11.‖ For better or worse, the only hope to track them all is an exceptionally deep, organized, and free-ranging intelligence apparatus, experts say. 
intelligence than ever to determine which of the multifarious new jihadist groups is a true threat. --The really difficult strategic question for us is which one of these groups 
do we take on,‖ Hayden says. --If you jump too quickly and you put too much of a 
generic American face on it, then you may make them mad at us when they weren't before. So we are going to need a pretty nuanced and sophisticated understanding of where there these new groups are going and where we need to step up and intervene.‖ Some officials suggest that to do that -- to discriminate carefully between the terrorists who are directly targeting U.S. interests and those who aren't -- the United States needs to step up, not slow down, the NSA's monitoring of potential targets. When it comes to the widening jihadist-controlled regions in Syria for example, Rogers says, --we know there's an ongoing rift between al-Qaida in the Levant, al- 
Qaida in Iraq, and al-Qaida core about whether that safe haven should be used to 
conduct ‗external operations.'‖ That discussion, and the large numbers of Western jihadists who are flocking to Syria to fight Assad but could someday turn their 
attention back to America, is what --keeps guys like me up at night.‖ 
1920. John Yoo, (Berkeley law professor), NATIONAL REVIEW, Aug. 16, 2013 
retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.nationalreview.com/corner/356027/ending-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.nationalreview.com/corner/356027/ending-]nsa-surveillance-not-answer-john-yoo). To end the NSA's efforts to intercept terrorist 
communications would be to willfully blind ourselves to the most valuable 
intelligence sources on al-Qaeda (now that the president won't allow the capture and interrogation of al-Qaeda leaders). The more useful question is whether there is a cost-effective way to reduce the error rate without detracting from the effectiveness of the program, which, by General Keith Alexander's accounting, has been high. Increasing judicial oversight might reduce errors  --  though I am dubious  --  but in a way that would seriously slow down the speed of the program, which is all-important if the mission is to stop terrorists. And perhaps Congress should think about ways to remedy any privacy violations in the future. But to end the program because it does not have an error rate of zero is to impose a demand on the NSA that no other 
government program, foreign or domestic, military or civilian, could survive. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	15 3 
 
 
 
1921. Peter Margulies, (Rogers Williams law professor), HASTINGS LAW JOURNAL, Sept. 10, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn/]com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2400809. The utility of the metadata program has been the subject of vigorous debate, with the government initially insisting that the program was --essential‖ and critics suggesting that the government's claims were inflated. The fog of rhetoric on both sides obscures common ground. The program cannot claim exclusive credit for stopping a terrorist plot, and in most investigations other alternatives could have provided (or actually did provide) information that identified the plotters. However, the most careful and comprehensive critics concede that the program has provided early information in investigations, allowed law enforcement to rule out suspects, and hedged against the persistent problem of disparate agencies failing to --connect the dots.‖ The single court to squarely address this question has agreed that the program is helpful because it allows the government to effectively, reliably, and expeditiously trace connections between known and unknown terrorists. Having a large database enhances the comprehensiveness of the government's search for connections. As the district court noted in ACLU v. Clapper, --without all the data points, the Government cannot be certain it connected the pertinent ones.‖ Having a single large database avoids the waste of time entailed in chasing down leads with different telecommunications providers. Promulgating a single set of rules for that database ensures that data will be deleted only when the government, taking both security and privacy into account, is confident that the data is irrelevant. 
1922. Peter Margulies, (Rogers Williams law professor), HASTINGS LAW 
JOURNAL, Sept. 10, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn/]
com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2400809. For an illustration of the benefits and limits of the metadata program, consider the case of Najibullah Zazi, who had plotted in 2009 to bomb New York City subways. Pursuant to the metadata program, the NSA provided the FBI with information --early in the investigation‖ showing Zazi's telephone calls. The NSA also provided the FBI with --additional leads‖ throughout 
the investigation. Moreover, the NSA used § 215 to ascertain the unknown telephone 
number of one of Zazi's New York accomplices, Adis Medunjanin. While this information may well have been available from other sources, the metadata program is what provided the facts. 
1923. Peter Margulies, (Rogers Williams law professor), HASTINGS LAW 
JOURNAL, Sept. 10, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn/]
com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2400809. The metadata program also plays an 
important role in allocating government counterterrorism resources. For example, as Ryan Goodman suggests, the comprehensive nature of the § 215 program allows the 
government to rule out foreign connections to plots such as the Boston Marathon 
bombing. While this capability may not be as eye-catching as the ability to ferret out 
a pending plot, it can help law enforcement and national security officials allocate 
resources in the long and short term. In the long term, the metadata program gives officials a view from 20,000 feet on the links to Al Qaeda within the U.S. If queries 
show a relatively small presence, officials can focus their efforts narrowly, and 
devote more resources to foreign threats. The metadata program reduces the 
guesswork involved in allocation decisions, and solidifies the factual foundation for 
these complex determinations. In the near term, the metadata program can inform 
allocation of resources in the chaotic period immediately following an attack. During 
the Boston Marathon bombing investigation, for example, § 215 collection helped to confirm early on that the Tsarnaev brothers acted without foreign assistance. That confirmation curbed counterproductive speculation, and focused resources on the Tsarnaev brothers' role. 
1924. Peter Margulies, (Rogers Williams law professor), HASTINGS LAW 
JOURNAL, Sept. 10, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn/]com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2400809. The metadata program also provides for efficiency in tracing contacts. In some investigations, speed may turn out to be less important, because law enforcement officials are gathering information and monitoring a subject over time. However, as Director of the FBI James Comey testified to Congress in January 2014, the --agility‖ produced by the metadata 
program may turn out to be quite useful in a fast-moving investigation. Comey put it 
simply: that agility, which permits law enforcement to accomplish --in minutes what would otherwise take  hours,‖ is --not material except when it matters most.‖ Finally, the metadata program is a useful hedge if agencies fail to share information that will allow them to connect the dots in a counterterrorism investigation. This failure was the most salient problem with the actions of law enforcement and security officials prior to the September 11 attacks. Although the situation has improved, deficits in cooperation will inevitably occur whenever agencies seek to co-exist. 
[ellipsis in original] 
1925. Glenn Sulmasy, (Coast Guard academy law professor), CNN, June 10, 2013, 
retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.cnn.com/2013/06/10/opinion/sulmasy-nsa-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.cnn.com/2013/06/10/opinion/sulmasy-nsa-]snowden/). The current threat by al Qaeda and jihadists is one that requires aggressive intelligence collection and efforts. One has to look no further than the disruption of the New York City subway bombers (the one being touted by DNI Clapper) or the Boston Marathon bombers to know that the war on al Qaeda is coming home to us, to our citizens, to our students, to our streets and our subways. This 21st century war is 
different and requires new ways and methods of gathering information. As 
technology has increased, so has our ability to gather valuable, often actionable, intelligence. However, the move toward --home-grown‖ terror will necessarily require, by accident or purposefully, collections of U.S. citizens' conversations with potential overseas persons of interest. An open society, such as the United States, ironically needs to use this technology to protect itself. This truth is naturally uncomfortable for a country with a Constitution that prevents the federal government from conducting --unreasonable searches and seizures.‖ American historical resistance towards such activities is a bedrock of our laws, policies and police procedures. But 
what might have been reasonable 10 years ago is not the same any longer. The 
constant armed struggle against the jihadists has adjusted our beliefs on what we think our government can, and must, do in order to protect its citizens. 


1926. Tom Gjelten, (NPR Correspondent), NPR, June 15, 2013 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.npr.org/2013/06/15/191694315/high-tech-surveillance-targets-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.npr.org/2013/06/15/191694315/high-tech-surveillance-targets-]
evolving-terrorist-tactics. FBI Director Robert Mueller made that point back in 2008, 
as Congress considered whether to amend the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. 
--In this day and age, our ability to gain intelligence on the plans, the plots of those who wish to attack us is dependent on us obtaining information relating to cellphones, Internet, email, wire transfers, all of these areas,‖ he said. If all the action was in that electronic space five years ago, it's even more so today, as intelligence and security officials constantly point out. Speaking in February, the NSA's general counsel, Rajesh De, threw out some figures on the explosive growth in communication data. --More data crosses the Internet every second today than existed on the Internet 20 years ago. Global mobile traffic grew 70 percent last year alone,‖ he said. Officials say these trends highlight the challenge facing spy agencies: With so much communication now taking place in the digital world, intelligence officers have to be able to follow that communication. 
1927. Tom Gjelten, (NPR Correspondent), NPR, June 15, 2013 retrieved April 16, 
2015 from http://www.npr.org/2013/06/15/191694315/high-tech-surveillance-targets-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.npr.org/2013/06/15/191694315/high-tech-surveillance-targets-]
evolving-terrorist-tactics. Negroponte, who served as U.S. ambassador to Iraq, says no one method is sufficient. He recalls how in 2006, the combination of different intelligence sources led the U.S. military to the head of al-Qaida in Iraq, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi. --I believe his phone number was detected through human intelligence. Somebody gave us his phone number. Then, that phone number was monitored through signals intelligence. And then his movements were tracked by geo-spatial intelligence  --  drones and so forth,‖ he says. --So it's actually the integration of these different methodologies that actually give you the best results.‖ The expanded use of telephone and Internet surveillance is in part an adaptation to the information revolution. The NSA, the CIA and other agencies will defend these programs vigorously on that basis, despite concerns that Americans' privacy has been put at risk. But that's not the whole story: It's also clear that the programs are popular in the spy business simply because they're convenient and efficient. They make intelligence gathering easier. 
1928. Peter Margulies, (Rogers Williams law professor), HASTINGS LAW 
JOURNAL, Sept. 10, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn/]
com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2400809. Critics often pay insufficient heed to the 
fiduciary dimensions of secrecy and information collection. When an entity such as a labor union or the federal government invites the trust of its members or constituents, 
that entity takes on corresponding obligations. For example, labor unions must fairly 
represent their members. Federal officials must, within the bounds of the 
Constitution, provide for the safety and defense of U.S. persons from foreign and 
domestic threats. As precedents from U.S. law and history demonstrate, secrecy has 
often been a vital asset in meeting those obligations. While a fiduciary must often 
keep information secret, she must also acquire information about threats to her stakeholders. To that end, Supreme Court has held that a union can obtain 
information that is --of use to the union in carrying out its statutory duties and 
responsibilities.‖ 
1929. Peter Margulies, (Rogers Williams law professor), HASTINGS LAW 
JOURNAL, Sept. 10, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn/]com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2400809. Both bulk collection of metadata under § 215 and foreign content collection under §702 served this fiduciary goal. While the metadata program's benefits were more diffuse, it allowed the government to quickly and reliably map out the contacts of known terrorist entities and operatives. That capability generated investigative leads, even granting critics' contention that the 
program did not by itself foil a specific attack. Moreover, the program played a useful 
role in allocating government resources. In chaotic situations such as the aftermath of the Boston Marathon bombing, the program enabled investigators to discern early on that the Tsarnaev brothers acted without foreign help, freeing officials to concentrate on the domestic realm. Even critics of the metadata program have agreed that § 702 has assisted the government in obtaining information --efficiently and effectively 
about foreign targets overseas.‖ 
1930. Peter Margulies, (Rogers Williams law professor), HASTINGS LAW 
JOURNAL, Sept. 10, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn/]
com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2400809. According to the President's Review Group, which President Obama commissioned to study surveillance after the Snowden disclosures, § 702 has played a concrete role in keeping he nation safe. The Review Group's report asserted that § 702 was --critical‖ to the uncovering of the Zazi planned subway attack in New York in 2009 and led to the arrest of Zazi and his accomplices. The § 702 program resulted in fifty-three out of fifty-four instances in obtaining information that --contributed in some degree‖ to a successful outcome 
regarding thwarted terrorist attacks in the U.S. and other countries. According to the 
Review Group, § 702 --does in fact play an important role in the nation's effort to prevent terrorist attacks across the globe.‖ The Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board (PCLOB) agreed with this assessment, concluding that collection under § 702 --significantly aids the government's efforts to prevent terrorism combat weapons 
proliferation and gather foreign intelligence.‖ [ellipsis in original] 
1931. Benjamin Wittes, (Brookings governance senior fellow), LAWFARE, Jan. 23, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/01/a-critique-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/01/a-critique-]
of-the-new-america-foundations-recent-nsa-report/). Let's start with the audit report 
that supposedly shows thousands of violations of privacy rules and legal breaches. To 
be clear, not one of these 2,776 --incidents‖ (over a year at the NSA's headquarters) 
involves a decision by any NSA employee to engage in illegal surveillance against an 
American. They are nearly all inadvertent mistakes of a technical nature -- the 
majority of a few discrete types. The bulk are --roamers,‖ which take place when a valid foreign intelligence target happens to cross into the United States. The IG report 
notes that --Roamer incidents are largely unpreventable, even with good target 
awareness and traffic review, since target travel activities are often unannounced and 
not easily predicted‖. There are also a fair number of database query errors -- that is, 
typos, confusions of boolean terms like --and‖ and --or,‖ syntax errors, and the like. You know . . . mistakes. These mistakes are caught through a combination of 
automated checking, auditing, and self-reporting. In other words, the fewer than 
3,000 incidents reported over the year in question involve the NSA's own systems --  
and people -- catching and correcting technical errors. [ellipsis in original] 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	15 4 
 
 
 
1932. Benjamin Wittes, (Brookings governance senior fellow), LAWFARE, Jan. 23, 2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/01/a-critique-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/01/a-critique-]of-the-new-america-foundations-recent-nsa-report/). Even the section entitled --Significant Incidents of Non-compliance‖ does not detail anything like any intentional violation of the privacy rights of Americans. One incident involved the retention of FISA business records material longer than the permitted five years. Another involved an incident in which collection continued against an individual after indications had arisen suggesting he had a green card; this stopped when a senior linguist figured out that those indications had been received and not noticed. In other words, what this document shows is that among the billions and billions of communications the NSA interacts with every year, it has certain low rate of technical errors, many of them unavoidable, which it dutifully records and counts. As we used to say in grade school, big whoop. Or rather, it is a big whoop -- just for the 


1938. Ryan Goodman, (NYU law professor), JUST SECURITY, Dec. 27, 2013 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://justsecurity.org/5087/effectiveness-telephony-  [HYPERLINK: http://justsecurity.org/5087/effectiveness-telephony-]metadata-program/. Notably, a statement by the leadership of the House and Senate Intelligence Committees appeared to suggest that the 215 program satisfied the high bar. They stated: --a number of recommendations in the report should not be adopted by Congress, starting with those based on the misleading conclusion that the NSA's 
metadata program is ‗not essential to preventing attacks.'  We continue to believe 
that it is vital this lawful collection program continue.‖ However, Senator Feinstein appeared to back off that characterization in an interview, where she stated, --I'm not saying it's indispensable, but I'm saying that it is important and it is a major tool in 
ferreting out a potential terrorist attack.‖ [ellipsis in original] 
1939. Peter Margulies, (Rogers Williams law professor), HASTINGS LAW 

opposite reason than the Post's story suggests 
JOURNAL, 
Sept. 
10, 
2014 
retrieved 
April 
16, 
2015 
from 

1933. Benjamin Wittes, (Brookings governance senior fellow), LAWFARE, Jan. 23, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/01/a-critique-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/01/a-critique-]
of-the-new-america-foundations-recent-nsa-report/). First, if you're looking for NSA impact, a database of US citizens is the wrong place to look. NSA, after all, is a foreign intelligence agency that isn't allowed to operate domestically, as a general matter. The 702 program specifically bars the targeting of US persons, requiring that targets be reasonably believed to be non-US persons overseas. Yes, the bulk 
telephony metadata program involves domestic and one-end-in-US acquisition of 
metadata, but that is specifically to assess whether domestic plots might have a foreign nexus and whether foreign plots may have an agent operating in the US. This 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2400809. The [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2400809] courts have also 
tended to show deference to government decisions on technology and national security. In granting this deference, courts have recognized that a failure to show deference could confine technology to the status quo, chilling innovation. Moreover, courts have recognized that requiring public disclosure of surveillance methods would allow terrorists and other adversaries to --adapt‖ to those methods and thereby evade detection. In addition, courts have viewed technological advances as shield as well as sword, possessing the potential to enhance privacy and enable curbs on government overreaching. 
1940. Peter Margulies, (Rogers Williams law professor), HASTINGS LAW 

is not an agency that investigates US nationals. So looking at a large database of US 
JOURNAL, 
Sept. 
10, 
2014 
retrieved 
April 
16, 
2015 
from 

nationals and finding limited NSA involvement says very little about the effectiveness of the programs in question. 
1934. Benjamin Wittes, (Brookings governance senior fellow), LAWFARE, Jan. 23, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/01/a-critique-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/01/a-critique-]
of-the-new-america-foundations-recent-nsa-report/). Second, NSA is not a law 
enforcement agency, so looking at a group of criminal cases is also the wrong 
haystack in which to find the needles at issue here. The perfect NSA operation would 
be focused on identifying and disrupting some activity overseas and might never result in an indictment in a US court. So looking at a bunch of criminals cases and 
finding a minimal NSA footprint is a little bit like looking at a bunch of criminal 
cases and finding that the local fire department has been ineffective because its work 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2400809. The [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2400809] first point here is 
most obvious. Executive agencies have access to information on a far broader scale 
than courts. Courts that second-guess agencies risk getting it wrong. The second point requires more unpacking. Requiring express authorization from Congress obliges 
executive branch officials to repeatedly return to Congress for permission to employ 
new technology. That requirement has some advantages for deliberation and 
individual rights, but it also has two key drawbacks: (1) in the national security field, 
it increases the risk that some technological advances will be disclosed before it is in the United States' interest to disclose them, and (2) it makes the implementation of 
new technology far more unwieldy. 
1941. Zacharay Clopton (Assistant US Attorney Civil Division), MICHIGAN LAW 

only shows up in a few arson cases. Arson is only one small part of firefighting. And 
REVIEW, 
Mar. 
31, 
2012, 
retrieved 
April 
14, 
2015 
from 

the criminal case is only one possible disposition for an intelligence agency -- and not 
necessarily the most prized disposition. This problem is compounded by the fact that 
NSA material will generally not be admissible evidence (there are exceptions to that 
rule, but it's a good rule of thumb) and the government generally won't want to 
release it in the context of criminal cases (there are exceptions to that rule too, but it's 
also a good rule of thumb), so by the time you have a criminal case developed, the 
prosecutors will typically be presenting evidence that the FBI generated. This may 
follow a tip or lead from NSA, but the those tracks -- at least when all goes well -- will tend to be covered. 
1935. Benjamin Wittes, (Brookings governance senior fellow), LAWFARE, Jan. 23, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/01/a-critique-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/01/a-critique-]of-the-new-america-foundations-recent-nsa-report/). Third, the New America Foundation report is focused on how a criminal case gets initiated -- that is, how authorities first learn of a particular plot. I'm not sure what the right metric is here, 
but I'm sure that's the wrong one. Information can be critical at many different stages 
of an investigation -- whether a criminal or a national security investigation. If I were, say, the FBI, and a bomb went off at the Boston Marathon, it would be very useful and important to me to run the Tsarnaev brothers' telephone numbers through a database that could offer a window into whether they were having significant overseas contacts. It would be important even after I had identified them as the likely perpetrators, because it could provide insight into whether the bombing was a domestic matter or involved international terrorist groups. It might address the question of whether the AUMF applied -- a deeply important in its own right. It might 
also address the question of whether confederates were still active. None of this has 
anything to do with how the investigation initiated, but it could be critical important to how it proceeds. Information -- both in the form of evidence in criminal cases and 
in the form of intelligence in non-criminal investigations -- is cumulative, not binary. 
1936. Benjamin Wittes, (Brookings governance senior fellow), LAWFARE, Jan. 23, 
2014 retrieved April 16, 2015 from http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/01/a-critique-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/01/a-critique-]of-the-new-america-foundations-recent-nsa-report/). Finally, large numbers of the 
events in the New America Foundation database predate the authorities whose impact 
the group is studying. The list of events, available here, includes 105 separate incidents (as opposed to individuals). Of these, 24 predate 2006, when the law first enabled the current iteration of the 215 program. And quite a number more predate 2008, when Congress passed the FAA (including Section 702). This is not in and of itself devastating to the report, since metadata collection was taking place prior to 2006, as was overseas targeting of the communications contents of non-US persons overseas. But it does indicate a certain carelessness about what cases the database includes and excludes. To put the matter simply, the New America report is 
evaluating intelligence programs mostly directed at non-US persons overseas on the 
basis of the initiation only of law enforcement cases directed at US citizens, and it is looking at a body of cases that don't correspond temporally to the existence of the programs it seeks to evaluate. As I say, I have a lot of respect for Peter Bergen, but this seems to me a serious misfire. 
1937. Ryan Goodman, (NYU law professor), JUST SECURITY, Dec. 27, 2013 
retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://justsecurity.org/5087/effectiveness-telephony-  [HYPERLINK: http://justsecurity.org/5087/effectiveness-telephony-]
metadata-program/. Finally, this framework for considering CT effectiveness may 
help to think about the value of redundancy. Critics of the program appear to dismiss 
or devalue cases in which the program has yielded intelligence that corroborates 
information already provided by other means, or yielded data that could have been obtained by alternative techniques. But corroboration is often important in decision- 
making. And redundancy is often a smart institutional design across many types of 
systems -- one would think counterterrorism included. Again, the issue for the 
program's survival in whole or in part will boil down to whether it is worth all the 
tradeoffs -- but it is important to accurately gauge its benefits in making that calculation. 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2471145. In [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2471145] addition, this limited 
dormant doctrine should be palatable to most combatants in the --executive preemption‖ debate. Supremacy Clause literalists win the day on preemption --  executive policy statements, which do not appear in the Supremacy Clause, do not preempt state law. But critics of state-level foreign policy succeed in prohibiting some state action: in the limited area of executive exclusivity, the states join Congress on the sidelines. And, because the exclusive executive sphere will be policed by 
courts in the context of executive encroachment on Congress, critics of executive 
authority will not lose any new ground by applying the same standard to Congress and to the states. While scholars and courts may continue to debate the preemptive effect of other federal government actions or whether there is a dormant foreign affairs power that attaches to the federal government writ large, the coming separation-of-powers jurisprudence will create a small space for agreement in foreign affairs federalism. 
1942. Daniel Abebe, (Chicago law professor), SUPREME COURT REVIEW, Sept. 
17, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/]
papers.cfm?abstract_id=2327170. A common theme in foreign affairs law is the importance of the US speaking with --one voice‖ to the international community. Speaking with one voice, so the story goes, ensures mat the US is not embarrassed by multiple, inconsistent pronouncements from the several states or the different branches of the national government when it takes a position on a foreign affairs issue. Such acoustic dissonance from the US could potentially result in a loss of credibility, a reduced capacity to achieve foreign policy goals, and a greater chance of conflict with other countries. So, when the Constitution is unclear about the allocation 
of decision-making authority on an issue, but the President or the national 
government speaks first, the presumption in favor of speaking in one voice reduces the possibility of multiple governmental decision makers and permits the US to act clearly and decisively in foreign affairs. While it reduces acoustic dissonance, the presumption in favor of one voice has two other effects as well: the centralization of foreign affairs decision making in the federal government vis-a-vis the states and 
centralization of foreign affairs decision making in the President vis-a-vis Congress. 
1943. Daniel Abebe, (Chicago law professor), SUPREME COURT REVIEW, Sept. 
17, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/]
papers.cfm?abstract_id=2327170. In regulating the President's relationship with Congress, the Court's one-voice vehicle has been the political question doctrine. As 
elucidated by the Court in Baker v Carr the political question doctrine serves to 
insulate the courts from adjudicating cases that implicate issues that the Court views 
as properly resolved by the political branches. In Baker, the Court outlined a six- 
factor test, and this article focuses on one of Special relevance for foreign affairs: --the potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious pronouncements by various 
departments on one question,‖ in other words, when adjudicating the case would lead 
to the possibility of embarrassment by inhibiting the ability of the US to speak with 
one voice. In effect, the political question doctrine, at least as applied in the foreign 
affairs context, creates a first-mover bias: since the first mover is generally the first 
--voice‖ to speak authoritatively on a foreign affairs issue, its voice benefits from the 
presumption that one voice is preferred. And, since the first mover is most often the President instead of Congress, the political question doctrine typically serves to 
insulate the President's decision making from judicial review. At bottom, one factor 
of the political question doctrine's multifactor test suggests that one voice is almost 
always preferred and, given the President's capacity to act more quickly than 
Congress, it effectively means that the one voice will likely belong to the President. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	15 5 
 
 
 
1944. Jonathan Entin, (Case Western law professor), CASE WESTERN RESERVE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW, Fall 2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://law.case.edu/journals/JIL/Documents/45CaseWResJIntlL1&2.21.Article.Entin.  [HYPERLINK: http://law.case.edu/journals/JIL/Documents/45CaseWResJIntlL1%262.21.Article.Entin]pdf. The complexity of those questions is particularly evident in the military and diplomatic arenas. Reliance on the political process recognizes the uncertainties and contingencies involved in many of these matters. Moreover, interbranch negotiation rather than litigation recognizes that an effective government requires a degree of comity that is inconsistent with frequent reliance on the judiciary. Our system rests on a rich set of subtle understandings and an implicit sense of political limits. As a result, structural and institutional factors often dampen the inevitable conflicts that arise between Congress and the president. Excessive reliance on the judiciary tends to raise the stakes of conflict by clearly identifying winners and losers and by encouraging the assertion of extreme positions for short-term litigation advantage that might complicate the resolution of future disagreements. 
1945. Jonathan Entin, (Case Western law professor), CASE WESTERN RESERVE 
JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW, Fall 2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from 
http://law.case.edu/journals/JIL/Documents/45CaseWResJIntlL1&2.21.Article.Entin.  [HYPERLINK: http://law.case.edu/journals/JIL/Documents/45CaseWResJIntlL1%262.21.Article.Entin]pdf. In addition, the litigation process takes time. Of course, the Pentagon Papers case was resolved in less than three weeks after the New York Times published its first article on the subject. Ordinarily, however, the judicial process proceeds at a much statelier pace. Consider another landmark case, albeit one that dealt with domestic 
issues. Cooper v. Aaron was decided approximately one year after President 
Eisenhower dispatched federal troops to enforce the desegregation of Little Rock Central High School in the face of massive resistance encouraged by Arkansas Governor Orval Faubus. Often, disputes over military and diplomatic matters are time-sensitive. Expedited judicial review might help, but events on the ground might well frustrate orderly judicial disposition. 
1946. Dean Cheng, (Heritage senior fellow), HERITAGE FOUNDATION, May 21, 
2012, retrieved April 14, 2015 from http://www.heritage.org/research/  [HYPERLINK: http://www.heritage.org/research/]
reports/2012/05/winning-without-fighting-chinese-legal-warfare. Even where it is not 
seen as a deliberate misuse of the law, there are concerns that legal warfare will 
hamper Western, and especially American, military operations. As a summary of a 
2003 Council on Foreign Relations conference observes, --Lawfare can be used to undercut American objectives.‖ Furthermore, the 2005 National Defense Strategy of 
the United States (NDS) placed lawfare (the use of --judicial processes‖) alongside 
terrorism and international fora in its list of American vulnerabilities. In the 2008 
NDS, the Department of Defense noted that there is a significant concern with violent 
extremist movements --hiding behind international norms and national laws when it suits them, and attempting to subvert them when it does not.‖ The 2008 NDS goes on 
to state that there is a need to address --growing legal and regulatory restrictions that 
impede, and threaten to undermine, our military readiness.‖ The U.S. remains 
concerned that Western military commanders will operate under excessive restraint, 
choosing to err on the side of caution for fear of violating international law-especially 
the LOAC. Exacerbating this undue caution would be concerns about undercutting 
public support, both at home and abroad, if military operations were seen as contravening legal standards. 
1947. Michelle Van Cleave, (former US head of counterintelligence), WORLD 
AFFAIRS, November/December 2013, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.worldaffairsjournal.org/article/what-it-takes-defense-nsa. The [HYPERLINK: http://www.worldaffairsjournal.org/article/what-it-takes-defense-nsa] United States has built a global intelligence apparatus because it has global interests and global responsibilities. We have taken seriously the duties of leader of the free world, 
as two world wars, Korea, Vietnam, Afghanistan, Iraq, and freedom fighters in many 
parts of the world can attest. None of these duties in the last sixty years could have been met without the exceptional resources of NSA. Successive presidents and Congresses, entrusted with preserving and defending our freedom, have judged these investments to be vital to our nation's security. They have protected the core secrets that enable collection programs to succeed, as have those in US business and industry who have been integral to their success. The unquestioned qualitative edge of US intelligence has been as essential to defending this country and preserving our freedom as have the forces we have built to arm and equip our military. 


1950. Matthew Hulbert, (European Energy Review lead analyst), FORBES, Nov. 16, 2012, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.forbes.com/sites/matthew  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/matthew]hulbert/2012/11/16/a-terrorist-guide-to-energy-carnage/. There is of course a final option that could combine your Gulf strikes into a ‗single attack', and it's hitting vital maritime choke points instead. You have a range of possible attacks; RPG's or IED's on super tankers, ramming vessels into ports, or scuppering vessels to create 
blockages. We've looked at the numbers, and the Strait of Hormuz is the core target. 
It ships a massive 17.5mb/d of oil and 35bcf/d of gas, a move that would wipe out the bulk of Gulf / Persian energy supplies. How long an attack could sustain outages is unclear, but given demand remains relatively inelastic, it would have a major price effect. There are other vital waterways to consider; the Malacca Straits, Bab al Mandeb, the Singapore Straits, the Bosphorous and Suez Canal are all significant, but unlikely to have the impact as Hormuz. 
1951. Diego Cordano, (Consultancy Africa intelligence analyst), CONSULTANCY 
AFRICA INTELLIGENCE, May 21, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from 
http://www.consultancyafrica.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id  [HYPERLINK: http://www.consultancyafrica.com/index.php?option=com_content&amp;view=article&amp;id]=1684:the-terrorist-threat-to-energy-infrastructure-in-north-africa&catid=60:conflict- terrorism-discussion-papers&Itemid=265. North Africa is an important area for the production of hydrocarbons. Libya, Algeria and Egypt play a leading role as producing states and are net energy exporters. Tunisia and Morocco are also characterized by a smaller production and are transit countries for important pipelines. Although oil and gas production and the reserves present in this region cannot be compared to those in other areas, such as the Middle East, North Africa's role is still significant: according to the British Petroleum (BP) Statistical Review of World Energy, the region boasts 3.9% of world oil reserves and 4.5% of the world's production. At the same time, as regards to natural gas, the whole region has 4.3% of gas reserves and produces 4.6% of the world's production. 
1952. Diego Cordano, (Consultancy Africa intelligence analyst), CONSULTANCY 
AFRICA INTELLIGENCE, May 21, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from 
http://www.consultancyafrica.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id  [HYPERLINK: http://www.consultancyafrica.com/index.php?option=com_content&amp;view=article&amp;id]
=1684:the-terrorist-threat-to-energy-infrastructure-in-north-africa&catid=60:conflict- 
terrorism-discussion-papers&Itemid=265. North Africa is an important source of energy, especially gas, for several European countries. In particular, Spain, Italy and France are dependent on North African gas supplies to meet much of their energy needs. Looking, for example, at Algerian natural gas, Italy is the single largest recipient of Algerian pipeline exports (62%), with the remainder of exports to Europe going to Spain (27%), Portugal (6%) and Slovenia (1%). The European Union's countries import, on the whole, 13% of natural gas from Algeria, which is the third country from which Europe imports natural gas after Russia and Norway. Egypt, Libya and Algeria are also among the export countries for Europe of crude oil and LNG, although with a relatively small percentage. At a time when Europe is looking to ease dependence on Russian reserves, especially after the events in Ukraine in 2014, consistency and the possible growth in production in the North Africa region can be particularly relevant. 
1953. Diego Cordano, (Consultancy Africa intelligence analyst), CONSULTANCY 
AFRICA INTELLIGENCE, May 21, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.consultancyafrica.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id  [HYPERLINK: http://www.consultancyafrica.com/index.php?option=com_content&amp;view=article&amp;id]=1684:the-terrorist-threat-to-energy-infrastructure-in-north-africa&catid=60:conflict- 
terrorism-discussion-papers&Itemid=265. North Africa is characterized by the 
presence of several groups that have an interest in hitting energy infrastructures and disrupting the flow of energy between North Africa and foreign countries. The level of terrorism in the region has been rather high in the last three years. In 2013, for example, including kidnappings, assassinations, bombings, and direct assaults on government facilities and personnel, 51 terrorist attacks have been carried out in Algeria, 146 in Libya and 17 in Tunisia. These have been the highest figures since 2001. Egypt is also experiencing a high level of instability, with terrorist and extremist groups carrying out attacks within the country, especially in the Sinai Peninsula. 
1954. Nick Cunningham, (Washington DC-based writer on energy and environmental 
issues), OILPRICE.COM, Jan. 11, 2015 retrieved April 29, 2015 from 

1948. Matthew Hulbert, (European Energy Review lead analyst), FORBES, Nov. 16, 	http://oilprice.com/Energy/Crude-Oil/Could-ISIS-Attack-Saudi-Oil.html. What  [HYPERLINK: http://oilprice.com/Energy/Crude-Oil/Could-ISIS-Attack-Saudi-Oil.html]	if 

2012, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.forbes.com/sites/matthew  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/matthew]
hulbert/2012/11/16/a-terrorist-guide-to-energy-carnage/. That leaves you with a more familiar target: Saudi Arabia. It's the only player with any excess supply as the swing producer in OPEC able to pump up to 12mb/d (or so). Take them out, and the energy world has no way of covering supply gaps. We won't bother putting a price target on the spikes, but $200-300/b easily comes into range. You know one of the targets, 
Abqaiq, where you failed to orchestrate a successful attack on the 5-6mb/d processing 
plant in 2006. The other, equally prized target, would be Ras Tanura terminals shipping up to 8-9mb/d production out of the Kingdom. These are both very ‗hard targets' given your current capabilities, but they are the biggest prize going for a ‗set piece' attack. 
1949. Matthew Hulbert, (European Energy Review lead analyst), FORBES, Nov. 16, 
2012, retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://www.forbes.com/sites/matthew  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/matthew]
hulbert/2012/11/16/a-terrorist-guide-to-energy-carnage/. We do however have 
another option that would be catastrophic for the gas world rather than going after 
hardened oil targets. Just as Saudi Arabia is the swing producer for the oil world, 
Qatar is the largest LNG producer in the world. Its 77mt/y of LNG trains account for 25% of global supply. That makes it critical to setting spot prices in Europe, and 
increasingly so in Asia, and Ras Laffan would be the key target go for, home to half 
of Qatar's LNG export plays. Admittedly, price hikes on wholesale gas hubs might 
not be fatal for the global economy (it would have zero effect on American Henry 
Hub benchmarks), but we'd expect to see a serious uptick for oil prices as well. If Qatar is attacked, markets will fear for the rest of the Gulf. Rather like fall-out from 
the Arab Spring, contagion spreads very quickly for market sentiment in the Gulf. 
ISIS attacked energy installations? The January 5 attack at the border was a worrying, albeit, small warning of what is possible. As the largest exporter of crude oil in the world, an attack on oil-related facilities - even if unsuccessful - could rattle the markets. After all, in the immediate aftermath of a failed 2006 Al Qaeda attack on Saudi Arabia's Abqaiq oil processing facility oil prices spiked 3.4 percent. Abqaiq is the world's largest processing facility, and if the 2006 attack had succeeded, it could 
have sent oil prices to unfathomable heights. 
1955. Laurie Garrett, (CFR global health senior fellow), FOREIGN POLICY, Jan. 5, 
2012 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://foreignpolicy.com/2012/01/05/flu-season/.  [HYPERLINK: http://foreignpolicy.com/2012/01/05/flu-season/]Clinton told the Palais des Nations audience that the threat of biological weapons could no longer be ignored because --there are warning signs,‖ including --evidence in Afghanistan that  al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula made a call to arms for - and I quote - ‗brothers with degrees in microbiology or chemistry to develop a weapon of 
mass destruction.'‖ (Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula is the terrorist group's 
Yemeni-based affiliate and perhaps its most aggressive arm today, with connections 
to a number of ambitious plots.) Then, in what has widely been interpreted as an 
allusion to the superflu experiments, Clinton added, --The nature of the problem is 
evolving. The advances in science and technology make it possible to both prevent 
and cure more diseases, but also easier for states and nonstate actors to develop biological weapons. A crude, but effective, terrorist weapon can be made by using a 
small sample of any number of widely available pathogens, inexpensive equipment, 
and college-level chemistry and biology. Even as it becomes easier to develop these 
weapons, it remains extremely difficult  to detect them, because almost any 
biological research can serve dual purposes. The same equipment and technical knowledge used for legitimate research to save lives can also be used to manufacture 
deadly diseases.‖ [ellipses in original] 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	15 6 
 
 
1956. Laurie Garrett, (CFR global health senior fellow), FOREIGN POLICY, Jan. 5, 	1962. Syra S. Madad, (Nova Southeastern University state health services 2012 retrieved April 19, 2015 from http://foreignpolicy.com/2012/01/05/flu-season/.  [HYPERLINK: http://foreignpolicy.com/2012/01/05/flu-season/]	department), JOURNAL OF BIOTERRORISM AND BIODEFENSE, Aug. 4, 2014 By the end of 2011, few governments or scientific committees were satisfied with the 	retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://omicsonline.org/open-access/bioterrorism-an-  [HYPERLINK: http://omicsonline.org/open-access/bioterrorism-an-]
actions that had been taken to date to limit publication of the methods Fouchier and 	emerging-global-health-threat.php?aid=30147. 	Biotechnology 	is 	growing 

Kawaoka deployed, and most were frankly frightened. The Fouchier episode laid bare the emptiness of biological-weapons prevention programs on the global, national, and local levels. Along with several older studies that are now garnering fresh attention, it has revealed that the political world is completely unprepared for the synthetic- biology revolution. So far, the rules - weak and inconsistent as they may be - have never been broken. Neither the Dutch virologist who created the roughly 90 percent mammalian transmissible form of superkiller H5N1 bird flu, nor the researchers who published a botulism cookbook - and not even the scientists who re-created the horrible 1918 flu virus or the fellows who constructed a polio virus from scratch - broke any existing rules. In every case, the researchers consulted with approval committees, sent their papers off when asked for review to various government 
committees, and then published their work openly in major scientific journals. 
1957. Austin Tymins, (Harvard Political Review staff writer), HARVARD 
POLITICAL REVIEW, Jan. 20, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from 
http://harvardpolitics.com/world/bioterrorist-threat/. While [HYPERLINK: http://harvardpolitics.com/world/bioterrorist-threat/] these vaccines would work on the normal strains of smallpox and anthrax, engineered strains or new diseases entirely could cripple society. The cost of a creating an operational stockpile likely outweighs the potential benefit of the stockpile, as a bioterrorist would simply choose an agent that the national stockpile couldn't confront. For example, the 
Department of Health and Human Services estimates that it would take 
approximately 16 weeks to develop a new vaccine to confront a new influenza pandemic. 
1958. Austin Tymins, (Harvard Political Review staff writer), HARVARD 
POLITICAL REVIEW, Jan. 20, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://harvardpolitics.com/world/bioterrorist-threat/. Biological [HYPERLINK: http://harvardpolitics.com/world/bioterrorist-threat/] agents are engineered 
with traits from many organisms in a way that makes them particularly dangerous. 
Bioterror expert Dr. Leonard Cole explained to the HPR the danger of bioengineered 
hybrid agents. --These organisms could be developed with the contagion capacity of 
the influenza virus, the lethality of Ebola, and the durability of anthrax.‖ While 
modern medicine is well prepared to deal with an outbreak of the bubonic plague or 
Spanish flu today, an outbreak of a new agent could easily have just as devastating an impact as its predecessors did centuries ago. In this way, the development and 
proliferation of biological weapons may be the greatest threat to human existence in 
the 21st century and beyond. 
1959. Syra S. Madad, (Nova Southeastern University state health services 
department), JOURNAL OF BIOTERRORISM AND BIODEFENSE, Aug. 4, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://omicsonline.org/open-access/bioterrorism-an-  [HYPERLINK: http://omicsonline.org/open-access/bioterrorism-an-]emerging-global-health-threat.php?aid=30147. In an age of advanced weaponry and tactics, the threat of bioterrorism has never been so real. This threat, long ignored and denied, poses a significant risk to not only the national security of all countries around the world, but to the health of all citizens. Recent bioterrorism events in the United States and previous events in Japan, Iraq, and Russia cast an ominous shadow. The threat focuses on the overall preparedness of health care first responders by new and reemerging infectious diseases used as bioweapons. These health care first responders, who include emergency room physicians, emergency medical technicians, nurses and physician assistants, laboratorians, and other health care professionals, who provide emergency health care services, will be on the forefront of diagnosing and providing appropriate and prompt treatment in response to a bioterrorism event. Thus, their ability to detect and respond to a bioterrorism attack that utilizes an infectious disease as weaponry is essential to minimize adverse health effects and prevent fatalities. 
1960. Syra S. Madad, (Nova Southeastern University state health services 
department), JOURNAL OF BIOTERRORISM AND BIODEFENSE, Aug. 4, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://omicsonline.org/open-access/bioterrorism-an-  [HYPERLINK: http://omicsonline.org/open-access/bioterrorism-an-]emerging-global-health-threat.php?aid=30147. Bioterrorism is the intentional or threatened use of viruses, bacteria, fungi, or toxins from living organisms to produce death or disease in humans, animals or plants to accomplish political or social objectives. Agents of bioterrorism can be altered or mutated in such a way so as to increase their virulence and ability to cause disease. They can be engineered to resist current medications. They can be spread through air, food, water, fomites, or through infected hosts (including humans, animals, insects, and other reservoirs). Furthermore, the detection of biological agents is very difficult as the illness can take anywhere from several hours to weeks, depending on the agent. Hence, the mortality rate of utilizing bioweapons can be astronomical as compared to conventional forms of killings (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC]). Rather than nuclear or chemical weapons, microbiological agents pose the highest risk, and such agents are gaining prominence around the world. 
1961. Syra S. Madad, (Nova Southeastern University state health services 
department), JOURNAL OF BIOTERRORISM AND BIODEFENSE, Aug. 4, 2014 
retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://omicsonline.org/open-access/bioterrorism-an-  [HYPERLINK: http://omicsonline.org/open-access/bioterrorism-an-]
emerging-global-health-threat.php?aid=30147. The threat of bioterrorism is more likely to occur now than ever before, including the following: As evident from past and present cases of bioweapons, nations and dissident individuals and groups exist that have both the motivation and access to skills to develop and disperse biological agents. The former Soviet Union bioweapons facility that was used to produce weaponized infectious diseases, such as plague and anthrax, has missing stockpiles of its bioweapons. Intelligent reports indicate the stockpiles were sold on the black- market to Middle Eastern countries. Furthermore, the scientists who worked in the offensive biological weapons program until the early 1990s have gone to other countries, such as North Korea and other Middle Eastern countries and are suspected to be collaborating with those governments in their clandestine bioweapons programs. 
tremendously, and there is readily information available on the Internet as to how to develop and manufacture sophisticated types of biological weapons with modest cost. Furthermore, there are numerous publications in scientific journals, explaining how to produce very sophisticated, highly pathogenic agents. Individuals with basic biology and engineering training could develop effective weapons at little cost. Populations have become increasingly vulnerable to disease, and medical providers are less familiar with appropriate diagnosis and treatment, thus making such weapons an ideal choice for those looking to cause mass causalities. Overall, bioweapons are relatively inexpensive, easy to produce, conceal and transport, and can cause considerable damage without elaborate weaponization. Thus, making them an ideal candidate to use as a weapon. 
1963. Tom Inglesby, (Pittsburgh Medicine and Public Health professor), CENTER 
FOR HEALTH SECURITY, Feb. 11, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from 
http://www.upmchealthsecurity.org/our-work/testimony/bioterrorism-assessing-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.upmchealthsecurity.org/our-work/testimony/bioterrorism-assessing-the-]
threat. I understand that this committee will soon have a classified hearing on the threat assessment. That will be important in giving you the US government assessment regarding what specific countries and groups are doing now with respect to research or development or stockpiling of biological weapons. All I will say related 
to this is that the workforce of scientists with microbiology and related relevant 
backgrounds that have enough knowledge to turn information and technology into bioweapons is countless and global. While particular threat briefings should help direct focus regarding specific terrorist groups' or countries' immediate interests in pursuing biological weapons, it is critical to understand that a country or group could change its direction on biological weapons in short order, quite possibly without any obvious signal. The former Soviet Union had a massive BW program for decades that was not visible to the outside. Given that small groups or even individuals are capable of making biological weapons and using them, we should expect not to have advanced warning regarding the development and their use. 
1964. Tom Inglesby, (Pittsburgh Medicine and Public Health professor), CENTER 
FOR HEALTH SECURITY, Feb. 11, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from 
http://www.upmchealthsecurity.org/our-work/testimony/bioterrorism-assessing-the-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.upmchealthsecurity.org/our-work/testimony/bioterrorism-assessing-the-]
threat. We also need to understand that the scope of future bioweapons events could 
be far, far greater that what we saw in 2001. In 2009, the US National Security Council said: --The effective dissemination of a lethal biological agent within an 
unprotected population could place at risk the lives of hundreds of thousands of 
people. The unmitigated consequences of such an event could overwhelm our public 
health capabilities, potentially causing an untold number of deaths. The economic 
cost could exceed $1 trillion for each such incident.‖ The use of such weapons could 
lead to substantial loss of life and great societal disruption. Even with a small or 
modest-sized attack, the social and economic impact would be significant. 
1965. Larry Bell, (Houston endowed professor), FORBES, July 21, 2013 retrieved 
April 29, 2015 from http://www.forbes.com/sites/larrybell/2013/07/21/bioterrorism-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.forbes.com/sites/larrybell/2013/07/21/bioterrorism-]
a-dirty-little-threat-with-huge-potential-consequences/2/. A 2011 study conducted by the Congressional Research Service observes that: --Unfortunately, the nature of the bioterrorism threat, with its high consequences and low frequency, makes determining the bioterrorism risk difficult. Additionally, the presence of an intelligent adversary who can adapt to the presence of successful countermeasures complicates the use of standard assessment techniques.‖ We should never doubt that terrorist adversaries are intelligent, have sophisticated and ever-advancing capabilities to 
inflict devastating casualties, or fully lack the will to do so. To believe otherwise 
could potentially be a deadly mistake. 
1966. Janet C. Phelan, (Civilian Intelligence Agency analyst), INTELLIHUB, Feb. 
26, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from https://www.intellihub.com/bioterror-threat-u- s-security/. The risk of biological attacks on the U.S. is an uncertain, imminent reality, stated Kadlec, who was assistant and senior director for biodefense policy for President George W. Bush and has a decades-long history with the US military. 
Kadlec went on to warn against the vulnerability presented by the US to such an 
attack, stating, --Our ability to predict or know when this threat will manifest itself is severely limited by the capabilities of our intelligence services' and the wide array of potential perpetrators who could conduct such attacks,‖ Affirming the deadly possibilities of such an attack, Kadlec said. --Biological weapons could inflict 
grievous harm on America, equal to and potentially greater than nuclear weapons.‖ 
1967. Janet C. Phelan, (Civilian Intelligence Agency analyst), INTELLIHUB, Feb. 
26, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from https://www.intellihub.com/bioterror-threat-u- 
s-security/. Kadlec thus adds his name to the growing number of US --insiders‖ who 
are issuing warnings about the imminent nature of either a biological weapons attack 
or a pandemic. The two possibilities differ only in genesis and intentionality. Either 
could devastate not only the population of a given country, but also, given the nature 
of global transportation in the twenty-first century, could become a world-wide event. 
Former US Senators Bob Graham and Jim Talent have issued similar warnings, as has Retired Colonel Ronald Larsen, who sits as executive director of the Weapons of 
Mass Destruction Center in Washington, DC. Both Senators Graham and Talent are 
listed as founding members of the WMD Center. Vaccine manufacturer J. Joseph 
Kim of Inovio Pharmaceuticals also issued a similar warning in 2012. Kim was 
quoted by US News as saying that a pandemic was --inevitable.‖ 
1968. Janet C. Phelan, (Civilian Intelligence Agency analyst), INTELLIHUB, Feb. 
26, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from https://www.intellihub.com/bioterror-threat-u- 
s-security/. At a meeting during the Biological Weapons Convention in 2011, DHS staffer Dr, Daniel Gerstein issued a similar warning, and was somewhat specific in his predictions, stating that such an event was --expected‖ by the end of 2013. While no world-wide pandemic occurred by the predicted date, bio-watchers have uneasily noted that there are several emerging strains which could become pandemic level events. Concerns have been generated in this regard in relation to MERS Corona virus and a couple of the bird flu strains now in evidence in the East, H7N9 and 
H5N1. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	15 7 
 
 
1969. Michael Pizzi, (Al Jazeera America digital news producer), AL JAZEERA 	1975. Christina Skinner, (Yale JD), CONNECTICUT LAW REVIEW, Aug. 9, 2013 
AMERICA, Jan. 7, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://america.  [HYPERLINK: http://america/]	retrieved 	April 	29, 	2015 	from 	http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm]

aljazeera.com/articles/2014/1/7/defense-leaders-saycyberwarfaregreatest 
threattous.html. Cyberwarfare is the greatest threat facing the United States - outstripping even terrorism - according to defense, military, and national security leaders in a Defense News poll, a sign that hawkish warnings about an imminent --cyber Pearl Harbor‖ have been absorbed in defense circles. That warning, issued by then Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta in Oct. 2012, struck many as a fear- mongering plug for defense and intelligence funding at a moment when many in the United States, including 32 percent of those polled by the same Defense News Leadership Poll, believe the government spends too much on defense. But 45 percent of the 352 industry leaders polled said cyberwarfare is the gravest danger to the U.S., underlining the government's shift in priority - and resources - towards the burgeoning digital arena of warfare. In 2010, the Pentagon created the U.S. Cyber Command, under the helm of NSA director Gen. Keith Alexander, to better prepare the U.S. for a potential attack on digital infrastructure. 
1970. Holly Ellyatt, (CNBC assistant producer), CNBC, Jan. 27, 2015 retrieved April 
29, 2015 from Nexis. Cyberterrorists to target critical infrastructure: A cyberterror attack on vital national infrastructure such as power facilities, transport networks and the financial sector could be imminent -- and international governments are ill- prepared, cybersecurity experts have warned. --It's not easy to predict what will happen, but the worst terrorist attacks are not expected,‖ Eugene Kaspersky, the co- founder and chief executive of global IT security firm Kaspersky Labs, told CNBC. --So I am afraid that if we face this cyberterrorism, it will be very unpredictable in a very unpredictable place, but with very visible damage. Unfortunately, there are 
many possible victims.‖ 
1971. Elise Viebeck, (The Hill reporter), THE HILL, March 10, 2015 retrieved April 
29, 2015 from http://thehill.com/policy/cybersecurity/235249-expert-predicts-very-  [HYPERLINK: http://thehill.com/policy/cybersecurity/235249-expert-predicts-very-]
bad-cyberattack-on-critical-infrastructure. U.S. infrastructure will suffer some --very 
bad incidents‖ before officials double down on cybersecurity, a leading information 
security expert predicted. Eugene Kaspersky, the founder and CEO of research and 
software firm Kaspersky Lab, said institutions that run power grids, chemical plants and other pieces of critical infrastructure are typically even slower to adopt good 
online security than corporations. The comments are the latest in a series of warnings 
to the infrastructure world to beef up cyber defenses before hackers or terrorists can 
use vulnerabilities to their advantage. --I don't predict any scenario that is greater than 
cyber terrorism,‖ Kaspersky said at a lunch with reporters, according to Network 
World. 
1972. Warwick Ashford, (Computer Weekly reporter), COMPUTER WEEKLY, 
April 9, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.computerweekly. 
com/news/2240217851/Cyber-threat-moving-to-critical-infrastructure-study-shows. 
The cyber threat is moving from data breaches to global critical infrastructure, an 
insurance industry commissioned study shows. Technology running the world's 
critical infrastructure is increasingly at risk of cyber attack, according to in-depth research by Lloyd's of London insurer Aegis London. The study, conducted by BAE Systems, covers the evolution of cyber risk in the energy sector and its impact on critical infrastructure businesses in the UK, Europe, US and Canada. Researchers found that state-sponsored cyber attacks are a serious and evolving threat to power and utility companies. A survey of energy and utility companies showed that most respondents believe a cyber attack of major significance and impact on critical operational infrastructure is highly likely. 
1973. Bill Gertz, (Washington Free Beacon senior editor) WASHINGTON FREE 
BEACON, July 24, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://freebeacon.  [HYPERLINK: http://freebeacon/]com/national-security/al-qaeda-targeting-u-s-infrastructure-for-digital-911/. --We're in a pre-9/11 moment, in some respects, with cyber,‖ said John Carlin, assistant attorney general for national security in the Justice Department. Carlin also said during remarks at a security conference that China's government dared the Obama administration to provide court-level evidence of Chinese military hacking against the 
United States. The dare resulted in the May 1 indictment of five members of the 
People's Liberation Army (PLA) hacking group known as Unit 63198, he said. On cyber terrorist attacks, Carlin said: --It's clear that the terrorists want to use cyber- enabled means to cause the maximum amount of destruction to our infrastructure.‖ --It's clear because they have said it,‖ he told the Aspen Security Forum, an annual gathering at the mountain resort town of senior, current, and former national security and military officials. 
1974. Christina Skinner, (Yale JD), CONNECTICUT LAW REVIEW, Aug. 9, 2013 
abstract_id=2305326. Cyber espionage, and economic-oriented cyber espionage in particular, poses a serious threat to the United States' national security. This type of espionage affects the sources of American power, namely, its comparative advantage in scientific and technological innovation and development. According to a report from the Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive, cyberspace, where most business activity and development of new ideas now takes place, allows malicious cyber-spies to quickly steal and transfer massive quantities of data while remaining anonymous and hard to detect. Cyber tools have enhanced the economic espionage threat, and the Intelligence Community (IC) judges the use of such tools is already a larger threat than more traditional espionage methods. As commentators have noted, the hemorrhage of intellectual property (IP) - our most important international competitive advantage - is a national crisis. Nearly every U.S. business sector -- advanced materials, electronics, pharmaceuticals and biotech, chemicals, aerospace, heavy equipment, autos, home products, software and defense systems --  has experienced massive theft and illegal reproduction. It comes as no surprise, then, that the 2010 National Security Strategy assessed [f]oreign economic collection and industrial espionageǁǁ as one of the most serious national security, public safety, and economic challenges we face as a nation. 
1976. Lara Crouch, (AEI Asian studies research assistant), AMERICAN 
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE, June 6, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from 
http://www.aei.org/publication/china-and-the-cyber-challenge/. However, [HYPERLINK: http://www.aei.org/publication/china-and-the-cyber-challenge/] cyber espionage is harder to compartmentalize and de-emphasize because it presents an immense challenge to the overall health of U.S.-Chinese economic ties. A February 2013 report published by Mandiant, an information security company, documents Chinese attacks against 141 targets in primarily English-speaking nations in numerous high-value sectors, including information technology, financial services, energy, and aerospace. Such widespread infiltration has already cost U.S. companies billions of dollars. The persistence of this theft could erode American confidence in pursuing closer economic ties in a way that no other issue has thus far. It will likely increase American reticence towards allowing significant Chinese investment in the United States, for example. 
1977. Lara Crouch, (AEI Asian studies research assistant), AMERICAN 
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE, June 6, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from 
http://www.aei.org/publication/china-and-the-cyber-challenge/. If [HYPERLINK: http://www.aei.org/publication/china-and-the-cyber-challenge/] dialogue proves 
fruitless, the United States could slowly start enacting cost-imposing measures that 
hold China accountable for current cyber activities and deter future ones. Admittedly, 
this will be difficult. How does a government react to small, everyday occurrences in cyberspace? Modest cost-imposing measures are likely to be more effective in 
demonstrating the detrimental effects of cyber and intellectual property theft if they 
are made in areas of U.S.-China collaboration. A commission co-chaired by former 
Director of National Intelligence Dennis Blair and former U.S. Ambassador to China 
Jon Huntsman recently put forth several interesting ideas to punish and deter IP theft in the private sector, such as denying use of the U.S. banking system to offending 
companies. To address state-sponsored activities, the United States could cancel 
summits and cooperative exchanges in response to high-profile hacking incidents, or 
pursue punitive economic actions comporting with World Trade Organization 
commitments. 
1978. Bill French, (National Security Network policy analyst), NATIONAL 
INTEREST, March 20, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://national  [HYPERLINK: http://national/]interest.org/commentary/china-the-cyber-great-game-8241?page=1. But the potential effects of these developments are not confined to the military dimension of the Sino- 
U.S. relationship. Instead, there is growing potential for feedback between the 
competition for military advantage in cyberspace and the conduct of economic cyber 
espionage. Given the apparent Chinese military involvement in economic espionage in cyberspace, future increases in the capabilities of Chinese government cyber actors -- like PLA Unit 61398 -- would translate into greater ability to steal economic data from foreign economies. Therefore, as competition with the U.S. military drives the PLA to become more capable in cyberspace, an unintended consequence for Washington may be undermining U.S. economic cybersecurity. 
1979. Bill French, (National Security Network policy analyst), NATIONAL 
INTEREST, March 20, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://national  [HYPERLINK: http://national/]
interest.org/commentary/china-the-cyber-great-game-8241?page=1. Second, cyber tensions between Washington and Beijing are becoming more strongly linked to the broader bilateral relationship. Following the release the Mandiant report, the New York Times reported that the Obama administration views Chinese cyber intrusions 

retrieved 
April 
29, 
2015 
from 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?  [HYPERLINK: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm]
as --so intense that they threaten the fundamental relationship between Washington 

abstract_id=2305326. Cyber spies are infiltrating America. While most Americans 
would probably say that spies, today, are found only Cold War novels and suspense 
films, that assumption is all too sanguine. Today, in the Internet and information-age, 
states have re-tooled their espionage technique for use in cyber space. And the United States is a prime target. Indeed, for the past several years, cyber espionage has been steadily wreaking havoc on the United States' economic and national security. Covert cyber intrusions, which target American industry, research, and technology, are 
steadily undermining the U.S. economy and America's global competitiveness. 
However, despite the damage that this spying has caused so far, these covert attacks 
continue, unabated, with no effective legal or policy response to date. 
and Beijing.‖ Far from a knee-jerk reaction, this follows former Secretary Clinton's 
initiative over the past year to elevate the significance of cybersecurity at the U.S.- Chinese Economic and Security Dialogue. 
1980. Joshua Philipp, (Epoch Times writer), EPOCH TIMES, Oct. 22, 2013 retrieved 
April 29, 2015 from http://www.theepochtimes.com/n3/326002-the-staggering-cost-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.theepochtimes.com/n3/326002-the-staggering-cost-]
of-economic-espionage-against-the-us/. BlackOps Partners Corporation, which does counterintelligence and protection of trade secrets and competitive advantage for 
Fortune 500 companies, estimates that $500 billion in raw innovation is stolen from U.S. companies each year. Raw innovation includes trade secrets, research and development, and products that give companies a competitive advantage. --When this innovation is meant to drive revenue, profit, and jobs for at least 10 years, we are losing the equivalent of $5 trillion out of the U.S. economy every year to economic espionage,‖ said Casey Fleming, CEO of BlackOps Partners Corporation. --To put it into perspective, the U.S. will take in $1.5 trillion in income taxes and $2.7 trillion in 
all taxes in 2013.‖ 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	15 8 
 
 
 
1981. Joshua Philipp, (Epoch Times writer), EPOCH TIMES, Oct. 22, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.theepochtimes.com/n3/326002-the-staggering-cost-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.theepochtimes.com/n3/326002-the-staggering-cost-]of-economic-espionage-against-the-us/. Due to the nature of the business, it is often difficult to place solid numbers on the cost of economic espionage. To protect their investors, companies rarely want to announce breaches by spies or hackers to the public, and government agents often find gathering enough evidence to charge an insider with espionage difficult. BlackOps is in a unique position, however, since working with numerous major companies directly on counterintelligence gives them insider knowledge on corporate losses. --Every company with trade secrets and competitive advantage is being targeted, secretly and deliberately by both insider and external spies,‖ Fleming said. --Protecting trade secrets and competitive advantage must be an immediate top priority in all U.S. companies with the highest level of 
aggressiveness.‖ 
1982. Peter Roff, (U.S. News & World Report contributing editor), US NEWS, Nov. 
19, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.usnews.com/opinion/blogs/peter-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.usnews.com/opinion/blogs/peter-]
roff/2013/11/19/intellectual-property-is-key-to-growth-and-security-in-the-internet- 
age. As Jones observed, the reasons enhanced protection of U.S. generated intellectual property are needed are not just economic; they affect U.S. national security. --Low quality counterfeit goods and phony parts leave us and our allies' critical infrastructure very vulnerable. IPR violations threaten our security in a more 
subtle, but no less noxious way,‖ Jones said. --Counterfeit goods and phony parts can 
make their way into critical infrastructure and security systems creating significant vulnerabilities, not just for ourselves but also for our allies whose property and security in this globalized world is increasingly linked directly to our own.‖ Moreover, he explained, there is a --connection between international criminal cartels 
and other organizations to include terrorism.‖ 
1983. Michele Nash-Hoff, (ElectroFab Sales founder and president), INDUSTRY 


1987. Matthew Kroenig, (Georgetown IR professor), MATTHEWKROENIG.COM, Oct. 5, 2014, retrieved April 10, 2014 from http://www.matthew kroenig.com/Kroenig_The Next Nuclear War.pdf. Since the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, scholars, analysts, and politicians have focused on the nexus of nuclear weapons and terrorism. In his closing statement at the 2012 Nuclear Security Summit, President Obama concluded, --We've agreed that nuclear terrorism is one of 
the most urgent and serious threats to global security.‖ Though there has been some 
debate on how seriously this threat should be taken, evidence indicates that terrorist organizations have both expressed a desire for nuclear weapons and made attempts to buy or seize nuclear material. Declassified documents from the United States suggest Osama bin Laden directed his associates to purchase uranium. In addition, Chechnya- based separatist groups, Lashkar-e-Taiba in South Asia, and Aum Shinrikyo in Japan have also expressed the desire for nuclear weapons in the past. Most analysts consider it unlikely that a state would knowingly provide a terrorist group with a bomb, but it is conceivable that a group could steal one. This fear is especially acute in the case of 
Pakistan, where an unstable government with a growing nuclear arsenal exists in an 
area with many terrorist organizations. The government of Pakistan has taken steps in recent years to allay these fears, yet reason for concern remains. 
1988. Matthew Kroenig, (Georgetown IR professor), MATTHEWKROENIG.COM, 
Oct. 5, 2014, retrieved April 10, 2014 from http://www.matthew kroenig.com/Kroenig_The Next Nuclear War.pdf. A second means by which a terrorist group could attain a nuclear capability is by obtaining fissile material and 
constructing its own crude nuclear bomb. The main challenge for terrorist 
organizations seeking this capability is finding sufficient fissile material. Approximately 8 kilograms of plutonium or 25 kilograms of highly enriched uranium (HEU) is necessary for a bomb. Since 9/11, the United States, Russia, the IAEA, and other partners have taken on a number of efforts to decrease the risks of terrorists accessing nuclear material. UN Security Council Resolution 1540, the 2005 

WEEK, 
Sept. 
11, 
2013 
retrieved 
April 
29, 
2015 
from 
Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, and 

http://www.industryweek.com/intellectual-property/why-protecting-intellectual-  [HYPERLINK: http://www.industryweek.com/intellectual-property/why-protecting-intellectual-]
property-critical-our-economy?page=2. In the last two decades, the competitive status 
of U. S. manufacturing has been increasingly challenged by the state-of-the-art 
technologies being developed by established nations such as Japan, Germany, Korea, and Taiwan. While emerging economies, such as China, are acquiring advanced 
manufacturing capability through R&D tax incentives and incentives for direct 
foreign investment, they still rely heavily on counterfeiting, pirating, and theft of 
American intellectual property to compete unfairly. 
1984. Michele Nash-Hoff, (ElectroFab Sales founder and president), INDUSTRY 
WEEK, Sept. 11, 2013 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://www.industryweek. 
com/intellectual-property/why-protecting-intellectual-property-critical-our- 
economy?page=2. In the July 12th article in The Hill, Stephen Ezell, a senior analyst with the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, wrote --IP-intensive industries are foundational to the U.S. economy. They contribute over $5.1 trillion in U.S. economic output, accounting for nearly 35 percent of U.S. GDP in 2010, as the U.S. Department of Commerce found in its report Intellectual Property and the U.S. Economy: Industries in Focus. At the same time, IP-intensive industries exported more than $1 trillion worth of goods and services in 2011, accounting for approximately 74 percent of total U.S. exports that year, and supported at least 40 
million jobs, or 20 percent of all U.S. private sector employment.‖ 
1985. Khalid Iqbal, (consultant to IPRI on Policy and Strategic Response), 
CRITERION QUARTERLY, Nov. 13, 2014, retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://www.criterion-quarterly.com/nuclear-terrorism-myth-and-reality/. At [HYPERLINK: http://www.criterion-quarterly.com/nuclear-terrorism-myth-and-reality/] least four 
terrorist groups have demonstrated interest in using a nuclear device. These groups 
operate in or near states with histories of questionable nuclear security practices. Terrorists do not need to steal a nuclear weapon. It is quite possible to make an improvised nuclear device from highly enriched uranium or plutonium being used for civilian purposes. According to leaked diplomatic documents, al-Qaeda can produce radiological weapons, after sourcing nuclear material and recruiting rogue scientists to build dirty bombs. Al-Qaeda, and some North Caucasus terrorist groups had consistently stated that they seek nuclear weapons and had even tried to acquire them. Al-Qaeda has sought nuclear weapons for almost two decades by attempting to purchase stolen nuclear material and weapons and has also sought nuclear expertise 
on numerous occasions. Osama bin Laden had also stated that the acquisition of 
nuclear weapons or other weapons of mass destruction is a --religious duty.‖ While pressure from a wide range of counter-terrorist activity has hampered Al-Qaeda's ability to manage such a complex project, there is no sign that it has jettisoned its goals of acquiring fissile material. Statements made as recently as 2008 indicate that Al-Qaeda's nuclear ambitions are still very strong. 
1986. Muhammad Hashmi, (M.Phil. in Defense and Strategic Studies), EURASIA 
REVIEW, Jan. 26, 2012, retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://www.eurasia 
review.com/26012012-nuclear-terrorism-a-rationale-choice-for-terrorists-analysis/. It 
is acknowledged that terrorist organizations are relatively weak in terms of power, prestige, and security, when compared with large states. So, these factors become a key to understand the dynamics of acquisition of nuclear technology by terrorist 
organizations. Terrorists have been constantly struggling to gain more and more 
power against their adversaries to boost their striking potential and this could be understood by Morgehthau's definition that the possession of power is really the 
possession of coercive potential. Prestige is also related to power and also an integral 
component of international relations. Prestige could play a motivating role and is 
subject to constant change. Coercive potential is directly related to the perceived 
power and prestige in one way or other. For terrorists to be perceived as credible source of threat, they must be perceived as powerful and prestigious. This may lead to 
the acquisition of ultimate weapons by terrorist organizations to raise a high and 
prestigious voice to fulfill their objectives or blackmail the adversaries. 
the 2005 International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism all seek to increase global cooperation to prevent nuclear terrorism. Overall, the 
global stocks of HEU and plutonium are decreasing, but the sheer volume of global 
fissile material makes this an on-going challenge and the U.S. budget for these activities has recently been cut. Unlike nuclear-armed states, it would be relatively difficult to deter terrorists from taking action. In other words, if efforts to keep nuclear weapons out of terrorist hands ever fail, we may witness a nuclear 9/11. 
1989. Mathew Bunn, (Harvard government professor), BELFER CENTER, Oct. 2, 
2013, retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/  [HYPERLINK: http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/]
publication/23430/steps_to_prevent_nuclear_terrorism.html. In 2011, Harvard's 
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs and the Russian Academy of 
Sciences' Institute for U.S. and Canadian Studies published --The U.S. - Russia Joint 
Threat Assessment on Nuclear Terrorism.‖ The assessment analyzed the means, motives, and access of would-be nuclear terrorists, and concluded that the threat of 
nuclear terrorism is urgent and real. The Washington and Seoul Nuclear Security 
Summits in 2010 and 2012 established and demonstrated a consensus among political 
leaders from around the world that nuclear terrorism poses a serious threat to the 
peace, security, and prosperity of our planet. For any country, a terrorist attack with a nuclear device would be an immediate and catastrophic disaster, and the negative 
effects would reverberate around the world far beyond the location and moment of 
the detonation. 
1990. Elizabeth Zolotukhina, (Columbia Harriman Institute MA), NYU JORDAN 
CENTER, Feb. 24, 2015, retrieved April 10, 2015 from http://jordanrussia  [HYPERLINK: http://jordanrussia/]
center.org/news/money-enough-role-economic-incentives-cooperative- 
nonproliferation-initiatives/ - .VRjL0PnF8g0). After the expiration of the CTR umbrella agreement, more limited U.S.-Russian nuclear security cooperation continued under the auspices of a 2003 accord, the Framework Agreement on a 
Multilateral Nuclear Environmental Program in the Russian Federation (MNEPR), 
and a related protocol signed on June 14, 2013. On December 16, 2014 Russian officials announced, not unexpectedly, Moscow's decision to terminate a large segment of nuclear security cooperation with Washington. Moscow's varied cooperation with CTR initiatives is puzzling, as the threat of theft or diversion of select Russian nuclear assets has not abated. Instead, it has morphed. Rather than emanating largely from a lack of physical protection elements (i.e. adequate fences, radiation detectors, etc) the current main threats to Russian nuclear materials are determined insiders, coupled with a questionable commitment by Moscow to ensuring sustainability and improving security culture. These continuing lapses ease 
smuggling, leakage, and possibly could enable terrorists to divert select Russian 
nuclear materials. There is also a real threat -- as well as past instances -- of theft, seizure, or diversion of select Russian nuclear material. Once diverted, it would be relatively easy to construct, transport, and detonate a crude nuclear explosive device. For a state-sponsored program, the difficulty in constructing a nuclear weapon lies first in legally acquiring the requisite nuclear material, and, later, in the miniaturization required to mount a nuclear warhead atop a guided missile. Terrorists and non-state actors are not bound by such considerations. Given the risks, it is crucial to ascertain the factor/s on which Moscow's cooperation with U.S.-Russian 
nonproliferation initiatives hinges. [ellipsis in original] 
1991. Anthony Barrett, (Carnegie Mellon University public policy PhD), SCIENCE 
& GLOBAL SECURITY, June 24, 2013, retrieved April 10, 2015 from Taylor and 
Francis. Second, terrorist groups or other actors might cause attacks on either the United States or Russia that resemble some kind of nuclear attack by the other nation by actions such as exploding a stolen or improvised nuclear bomb, especially if such an event occurs during a crisis between the United States and Russia. A variety of nuclear terrorism scenarios are possible. Al Qaeda has sought to obtain or construct nuclear weapons and to use them against the United States. Other methods could involve attempts to circumvent nuclear weapon launch control safeguards or exploit holes in their security. It has long been argued that the probability of inadvertent nuclear war is significantly higher during U.S.-Russian crisis conditions, with the Cuban Missile Crisis being a prime historical example. It is possible that U.S.- Russian relations will significantly deteriorate in the future, increasing nuclear tensions. There are a variety of ways for a third party to raise tensions between the United States and Russia, making one or both nations more likely to misinterpret events as attacks. 


 THE CASE AGAINST CURTAILING THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE 	15 9 
 
 
 
1992. Harry Conley, (ACC chief of Systems Analysis Branch), AIR & SPACE POWER JOURNAL, March 5, 2003, retrieved April 10, 2015 from 
http://www.airpower.maxwell.af.mil/airchronicles/apj/apj03/spr03/conley.html.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.airpower.maxwell.af.mil/airchronicles/apj/apj03/spr03/conley.html]
Besides simply the total number of casualties, the types of casualties - predominantly military versus civilian - will also affect the nature and scope of the US reprisal action. Military combat entails known risks, and the emotions resulting from a significant number of military casualties are not likely to be as forceful as they would be if the attack were against civilians. World War II provides perhaps the best examples for the kind of event or circumstance that would have to take place to trigger a nuclear response. A CBW event that produced a shock and death toll roughly equivalent to those arising from the attack on Pearl Harbor might be sufficient to prompt a nuclear retaliation. President Harry Truman's decision to drop atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki - based upon a calculation that up to one million casualties might be incurred in an invasion of the Japanese homeland - is an example of the kind of thought process that would have to occur prior to a nuclear response to a CBW event. Victor Utgoff suggests that --if nuclear retaliation is seen at the time to offer the best prospects for suppressing further CB attacks and speeding the defeat of the aggressor, and if the original attacks had caused severe damage that had outraged American or allied publics, nuclear retaliation would be more than just a 
possibility, whatever promises had been made.‖ 
1993. Khalid Iqbal, (consultant to IPRI on Policy and Strategic Response), 
CRITERION QUARTERLY, Nov. 13, 2014, retrieved April 10, 2015 from 
http://www.criterion-quarterly.com/nuclear-terrorism-myth-and-reality/. A [HYPERLINK: http://www.criterion-quarterly.com/nuclear-terrorism-myth-and-reality/] terrorist nuclear explosion could kill hundreds of thousands, create billions of dollars in damages and undermine the global economy. Former UN Secretary General, Kofi Annan, had said that an act of nuclear terrorism --would thrust tens of millions of people into dire poverty‖ and create --a second death toll throughout the developing world.‖ Surely after such an event, global leaders would produce a strong global system to ensure nuclear security. There is no reason to wait for a catastrophe to build such a system. Terrorists exploit gaps in security. The IAEA's ITDB indicates 


1998. Richard Haas, (CFR president) PROJECT SYNDICATE, April 30, 2013 
retrieved April 29, 2015 from https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/ 
repairing-the-roots-of-american-power-by-richard-n - haass. Finally, the world faces 
many serious challenges, ranging from the need to halt the spread of weapons of mass 
destruction, fight climate change, and maintain a functioning world economic order that promotes trade and investment to regulating practices in cyberspace, improving global health, and preventing armed conflicts. These problems will not simply go away or sort themselves out. While Adam Smith's --invisible hand‖ may ensure the success of free markets, it is powerless in the world of geopolitics. Order requires the visible hand of leadership to formulate and realize global responses to global challenges. 
1999. Richard Haas, (CFR president) PROJECT SYNDICATE, April 30, 2013 
retrieved April 29, 2015 from https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/ 
repairing-the-roots-of-american-power-by-richard-n - haass. Don't get me wrong: 
None of this is meant to suggest that the US can deal effectively with the world's 
problems on its own. Unilateralism rarely works. It is not just that the US lacks the means; the very nature of contemporary global problems suggests that only collective responses stand a good chance of succeeding. But multilateralism is much easier to advocate than to design and implement. Right now there is only one candidate for this role: the US. No other country has the necessary combination of capability and outlook. This brings me back to the argument that the US must put its house in order - economically, physically, socially, and politically - if it is to have the resources needed to promote order in the world. Everyone should hope that it does: The alternative to a world led by the US is not a world led by China, Europe, Russia, Japan, India, or any other country, but rather a world that is not led at all. Such a world would almost certainly be characterized by chronic crisis and conflict. That would be bad not just for Americans, but for the vast majority of the planet's inhabitants. 
2000. Martin Hutchinson, (United Press International business and economics editor), 
REUTERS, Jan. 3, 2014 retrieved April 29, 2015 from http://blogs.reuters.com/  [HYPERLINK: http://blogs.reuters.com/]

existence of sufficient gaps. The NCI opines that: --World cannot afford to wait for 	breakingviews/2014/01/03/the-chilling-echoes-of-1914-a-century-on/. 	Germany, 

the patchwork of nuclear security arrangements to fail before they are strengthened. 
Because we may not even know if materials that could be used in nuclear weapons are missing‖. If terrorist groups could sufficiently damage safety systems to cause a core meltdown at a nuclear power plant, and/or sufficiently damage spent fuel pools, then such an attack could lead to widespread radioactive contamination. 
1994. Martin Denholm, (Tech and Innovation Daily editor in chief), TECH AND 
INNOVATION DAILY, April 1, 2013 retrieved May 1, 2015 from 
http://www.techandinnovationdaily.com/2013/04/01/cyber-security-executive-order/.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.techandinnovationdaily.com/2013/04/01/cyber-security-executive-order/]
Of all the risks to America's national security, U.S. defense officials warn that a 
cyber attack now poses the greatest threat. And we're not just talking about attacks on the government or individual corporations anymore. Ominously, experts fear cyber 
terrorists' most likely target is also the most exposed The U.S. power grid. It turns 
out they're not the only ones worried, either. A recent survey from Tenable Network 
Security, which does business with the Department of Defense, showed that an 
overwhelming 92% of Americans feel the energy infrastructure - like the power grid 
and other public utilities - are vulnerable to an attack. [ellipsis in original] 
1995. Martin Denholm, (Tech and Innovation Daily editor in chief), TECH AND 
INNOVATION DAILY, April 1, 2013 retrieved May 1, 2015 from http://www.techandinnovationdaily.com/2013/04/01/cyber-security-executive-order/.  [HYPERLINK: http://www.techandinnovationdaily.com/2013/04/01/cyber-security-executive-order/]Gary McGraw, a cyber security expert at Cigital, says: --The idea would be to go after 
generation plants or maybe the grid itself in such a way that physical components of 
the grid would destroy themselves. It's quite possible to do this to make a transformer burn itself up Replacing a whole bunch, like thousands, or tens of thousands of transformers throughout the grid, would be something that would take us months or even years to recover from.‖ Bottom line: Cyber attacks are a serious and growing threat. We can't keep bumbling along, dodging the bullet from would-be online terrorists. Enacting comprehensive cyber security laws is essential and long overdue. A bill would at least help coordinate preventative measures between both government 
and private industry, as well as responses to threats and attacks. [ellipsis in original] 
1996. Richard Haas, (CFR president) PROJECT SYNDICATE, April 30, 2013 
retrieved April 29, 2015 from https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/ 
repairing-the-roots-of-american-power-by-richard-n - haass. Let me posit a radical 
idea: The most critical threat facing the United States now and for the foreseeable 
future is not a rising China, a reckless North Korea, a nuclear Iran, modern terrorism, 
or climate change. Although all of these constitute potential or actual threats, the biggest challenges facing the US are its burgeoning debt, crumbling infrastructure, second-rate primary and secondary schools, outdated immigration system, and slow economic growth - in short, the domestic foundations of American power. 
1997. Richard Haas, (CFR president) PROJECT SYNDICATE, April 30, 2013 
retrieved April 29, 2015 from https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/ 
repairing-the-roots-of-american-power-by-richard-n - haass. Part of the reason is 
economic. The US economy still accounts for about one-quarter of global output. If 
US growth accelerates, America's capacity to consume other countries' goods and 
services will increase, thereby boosting growth around the world. At a time when Europe is drifting and Asia is slowing, only the US (or, more broadly, North America) has the potential to drive global economic recovery. The US remains a unique source of innovation. Most of the world's citizens communicate with mobile devices based on technology developed in Silicon Valley; likewise, the Internet was made in America. More recently, new technologies developed in the US greatly increase the ability to extract oil and natural gas from underground formations. This technology is now making its way around the globe, allowing other societies to increase their energy production and decrease both their reliance on costly imports and their carbon emissions. The US is also an invaluable source of ideas. Its world- class universities educate a significant percentage of future world leaders. More fundamentally, the US has long been a leading example of what market economies and democratic politics can accomplish. People and governments around the world are far more likely to become more open if the American model is perceived to be succeeding. 
Austria, Russia and France lost between 20 and 35 percent of national output between 1913 and 1918, according to Angus Maddison's data used in Stephen Broadberry's 
--The Economics of World War One: A Comparative Analysis‖. British GDP declined 
in 1914 and 1915, but grew 15 percent over the four years, as did the U.S. economy. 
The 37 million military and civilian casualties may tell a more accurate story but if 
history were to repeat itself, the global conflict could be both more universal and more destructive. Nuclear weapons proliferate. Warped diplomatic anger could lead 
to the deployment of chemical and biological devices. Electromagnetic pulses could 
wipe out our fragile electronic networks. Like the assassination of Archduke 
Ferdinand that sparked World War One, the catalyst for cataclysm might be 
something quite surprising. A global run on bank and other investment assets or an outbreak of hyperinflation, maybe? These threats get more serious the more 
policymakers pump up equity, bond, property and banking bubbles. If global wealth 
evaporates, or is proven to be an illusion, today's largely cordial global entente could 
be smashed with precipitous speed. 

